A L
T RAN SPO
R National Transportation Safety Board
N T
O E PLURIBUS UNUM A
I T Washington, D.C. 20594
A T OI
N N
SAFETYBO
AR
D
Aircraft Accident Brief
Accident No.: DCA99MA088
Operator/Flight Number: Big Island Air flight 58
Aircraft and Registration: Piper PA-31-350, N411WL
Location: near Volcano, Hawaii
Date: September 25, 1999
HISTORY OF FLIGHT
On September 25, 1999, about 1726 Hawaiian standard time,1 Big Island Air flight 58, a
Piper PA-31-350 (Chieftain), N411WL, crashed on the northeast slope of the Mauna Loa
volcano2 near Volcano, Hawaii. The pilot and all nine passengers on board were killed, and the
airplane was destroyed by impact forces and a postimpact fire. The sightseeing tour flight was
operating under 14 Code of Federal Regulations (CFR) Part 135 as an on-demand air taxi
operation. A visual flight rules (VFR) flight plan was filed, and visual meteorological conditions
(VMC) existed at the Keahole-Kona International Airport (KOA), Kona, Hawaii, from which the
airplane departed about 1622. The investigation determined that instrument meteorological
conditions (IMC) prevailed in the vicinity of the accident site.
A Big Island Air employee who observed the pilot upon his arrival at KOA shortly before
0700 on the day of the accident stated that the pilot appeared to be alert and well rested. The pilot
was scheduled to make two air taxi flights that day. The morning sightseeing flight departed
about 0700, and the second (accident) flight departed about 1622.
The morning’s weather report was included on the “Flight Plans and Weather” form that
Big Island Air pilots typically reference before flying with an indicated time of about 0700. Big
Island Air’s Director of Operations (DO) reported to National Transportation Safety Board
investigators that he had obtained this weather information from the Federal Aviation
Administration’s (FAA) Honolulu Automated Flight Service Station (AFSS). No evidence exists
to indicate that the pilot sought or obtained an updated weather briefing for the accident flight
later that afternoon as required by the FAA.
1 Unless otherwise stated, all times in this report are Hawaiian standard time based on a 24-hour clock. The
investigation determined that sundown occurs about 1754.
2 The 10,100-foot mean sea level (msl) elevation accident site was located about 7.5 nautical miles (nm) east-
northeast from the 13,333-foot peak of the Mauna Loa volcano.
NTSB/AAB-01-02

2
The pilot departed KOA about 1622 for his second sightseeing tour of the day and
followed a half-island tour route. (For more information about the half-island tour route, see the
Additional Information section of this report.) About 1720, the pilot requested permission from
the Honolulu AFSS to transition through a restricted area of airspace (R-3103) that encompasses
part of the center of the saddle area.3 The pilot was advised by AFSS that the restricted area was
“open,” and he was authorized to transition the area for the next 30 minutes. The FAA did not
record any further radio transmissions from the accident pilot.
According to FAA-recorded radar data, at 1721:04, the accident airplane was located
approximately 16 nms east-southeast from the eastern side of the restricted area (about 8.5 nms
from the crash site). The accident airplane’s altitude, as transmitted by its Mode C-equipped
transponder, was about 6,600 feet, and the underlying terrain’s elevation was about 4,600 feet
msl. Both the airplane’s altitude and the terrain’s elevation were increasing.
Between 1721:04 and the last recorded radar return at 1725:29 (when the airplane was
within 1/3-mile of the accident site), the airplane’s average ground track was approximately
291 degrees, magnetic. During this time, the accident airplane’s altitude increased from about
6,600 to 9,600 feet. Several witnesses observed clouds below the 10,000-foot level around the
time of the accident. (For more information about weather conditions, see the Meteorological
Information section of this report.) About 1726, the accident airplane crashed on the northeast
slope of the Mauna Loa volcano at 10,100 feet msl.
PILOT INFORMATION
The pilot held an airline transport pilot certificate with the ratings and limitations of
airplane multiengine land and commercial privileges for airplane single-engine land. The pilot
was also certified as a ground instructor (advanced and instrument) and a flight instructor for
single-engine and instrument airplanes.4 The pilot’s FAA first-class medical certificate was
issued on August 14, 1999, with the limitation that the pilot wear corrective lenses. On the
medical examiner’s reporting form, a notation was made indicating that the pilot did not use
medication and that he was “in good health.” A background check was performed of the pilot’s
driving records for the status of his driver’s license, accident history, tickets, and alcohol usage
occurrences. No pertinent events or occurrences were found.
The Vice President of Big Island Air reported that he first met the pilot in 1987 when he
and the pilot were line captains for another air tour company in Hawaii.5 The Vice President
stated that he maintained a professional relationship with the pilot during the ensuing years. The
Vice President also stated that, on the basis of his personal knowledge about the pilot’s flying
background, his accident/incident-free flight record, his extensive flight experience in
multiengine airplanes, his PA-31-350 flight time, and his knowledge of Hawaii and its weather
patterns, the pilot was hired by Big Island Air on May 3, 1994. No formal preemployment
3 The saddle area between the Mauna Kea and Mauna Loa volcanoes is valley-like in its topography, with a
maximum elevation of about 6,800 feet msl.
4 The flight instructor certificate was issued in October 1984 and expired in 1995.
5 The company, Air Molokai, was based in Maui, Hawaii, and is no longer in business.
NTSB/AAB-01-02

3
checks were performed, and none were required, when the pilot was hired. Safety Board
investigators reviewed Big Island Air’s “Pilot’s Monthly Flight Time Report,” which revealed
that the pilot did not fly the operator’s airplanes between September 1, 1998, and August 14,
1999. The operator reported that during this time, the pilot had been studying in Japan.
According to the pilot’s flight record logbook, in 1985, 1986, 1988,6 1989,7 1994,8 and
1997, the pilot’s total flight time was “983.1”; “over 3,000”; “over 5,000”; “over 7,000”; “over
9,000”; and “10,979” flight hours, respectively. In August 1999, the pilot indicated that he had
flown a total of 11,500 hours. Big Island Air reported that during the preceding 30 days and
24 hours before the accident, the pilot had flown for 12.8 and 1.4 hours, respectively.
Big Island Air’s DO, who provided the pilot with his most recent flight training in
August 1999, stated that the pilot did not experience any particular problems during the training.
Records indicate that the pilot received flight and ground training on August 15, 23, and 29,
1999. Upon the successful completion of this training, the DO authorized the pilot to assume the
duties of pilot-in-command of the PA-31-350 airplane.
The principal operations inspector (POI) for Big Island Air provided records indicating
that the pilot had no previous accident, incident, or FAA enforcement history and that no warning
letters had been issued against the pilot during at least the previous 3 years. The POI’s records,
as entered into the Program Tracking & Reporting Subsystem (PTRS), were also reviewed. The
PTRS record entry dated August 30, 1999, indicated that the POI had visited the operator and
inspected the pilot’s records. The POI reported observing that the pilot was lacking 1 hour of
required training time. According to the PTRS record, the pilot’s training deficiency was
corrected “on the spot.” On August 30, 1999, the pilot successfully passed a 1-hour, FAA-
administered flight test in a PA-31-350, in which he demonstrated his proficiency regarding
emergency instrument flight procedures and flying the airplane in VMC. The FAA inspector
remarked on the “Airman Competency/Proficiency Check FAR [Federal Aviation Regulations]
135” form that the pilot had completed all Special Federal Aviation Regulations (SFAR) 719
requirements satisfactorily. The pilot was not authorized to perform instrument flight rules (IFR)
air taxi flights. The POI who had administered the accident pilot’s reinstatement check ride
stated that during the flight, the pilot performed an instrument landing system approach,
demonstrated competency performing unusual attitude recoveries, and performed other
maneuvers. The POI indicated that the pilot’s flying skill level was good.
The DO reported that he first met the pilot in 1990 and that he had never seen the pilot’s
personal flight record logbook or an application for employment. He stated that the pilot’s hiring
had been based, in part, upon his association with Big Island Air’s Vice President. According to
the DO, the pilot’s attention to his duties was satisfactory since he returned to work (in
6 In 1988, the pilot began working for Panorama and Samoa Air.
7 In 1989, the pilot was flying for Aloha Island Air.
8 In 1994, the pilot was flying for Big Island Air.
9 SFAR 71, “Special Operating Rules for Air Tour Operators in the State of Hawaii,” describes additional
operating procedures and limitations for air tour operators in Hawaii.
NTSB/AAB-01-02

4
August 1999). The DO evaluated the pilot’s skill and proficiency level as being “okay” and
described the pilot as “adequate.”
The pilot’s immediate supervisor, the chief pilot for Big Island Air, indicated that he had
never flown with the pilot but that the pilot would not have been retained by Big Island Air had
he not satisfactorily passed the company training program and the required FAA flight test.
On September 27, 1999, the Safety Board received correspondence from a passenger who
had flown with the accident pilot during a Big Island Air sightseeing tour on September 4, 1999.
The passenger’s description of the flight route was similar to that of the accident flight. The
passenger indicated that during his tour, the pilot had flown in dense clouds that prevented him
from being able to see both ahead of and below the airplane. Investigators subsequently viewed
photographs taken by the passenger and a videotape made by the passenger during his flight. The
tape showed the airplane flying in clouds on several occasions and in different locations
throughout the flight.
The pilot lived on the island of Oahu. According to his landlord, the pilot commuted to
work by air. The landlord indicated that the night before the accident flight, September 24, 1999,
the pilot went to bed about 2100. The landlord also indicated that because the pilot had an early
morning flight on September 25, he would likely have arisen about 0400 and then driven to the
Honolulu International Airport and flown on a commercial flight to KOA to begin work.
AIRPLANE INFORMATION
The accident airplane, N411WL, was a Piper PA-31-350 (Chieftain), manufactured in 1983
by Piper Aircraft Company. The airplane was owned by and registered to Big Island Air, Inc. The
available airplane records indicate that the airframe had accumulated about 4,523.7 flight hours.
The airplane was maintained pursuant to an approved aircraft inspection program under the
authorization of the company’s 14 CFR Part 135 operating certificate.
The left engine was a Lycoming TIO-540-J2BD, serial number (S/N) L-3907-61A, and the
right engine was a Lycoming LTIO-540-J2BD, S/N L-796-68A. The accident airplane was
equipped with very high frequency omni directional range (VOR) and distance measuring
equipment receivers. In addition, Big Island Air reported that the airplane was equipped with a
Garmin model 195 control yoke-mounted global positioning satellite (GPS) receiver that could
provide pictorial information on its moving map display and indicate the airplane’s altitude,
location, ground speed, and ground track.
Weight and Balance Information
Big Island Air tour flights are normally begun with the airplane’s auxiliary fuel tanks near
empty, and the main fuel tanks completely full. Before the accident flight, the pilot signed off on
the combined passenger load manifest/weight and balance form, which indicated the customary
NTSB/AAB-01-02

5
fuel distribution load and a total weight at takeoff of 7,304 pounds (lbs).10 However, the line
serviceman who last fueled the accident airplane indicated that before the accident flight, he had
“topped off” the auxiliary fuel tanks and pumped 20 gallons of fuel into each of the main tanks.
On the basis of this statement, the fuel meter tickets for the two airplane refueling events before
the accident flight, and a reconstruction of the airplane’s fuel burn during the flight that preceded
the accident flight, Big Island Air estimated that upon departure for the accident flight, the
airplane’s total weight was 7,592 lbs, about 224 lbs over its maximum allowable gross weight.
Safety Board calculations based on this departure weight and assuming normal fuel burn rate
indicated that at the time of the accident, the airplane’s weight was about 7,315 lbs. According
to the Board’s calculations, no center of gravity limits were exceeded.
Maintenance
A review was performed of the airplane’s utilization and discrepancy forms for the period
between its last maintenance inspection on August 31, 1999, and the date of the accident. No
maintenance discrepancies or corrective actions were noted. The DO indicated that he believed
that all equipment in the airplane was functioning normally. Maintenance records indicated that
the last progressive inspection, a Phase 6 inspection, had been performed at a recorded time of
4,480 flight hours on August 31, 1999.
METEOROLOGICAL INFORMATION
There is no continuously operating aviation weather reporting facility in the saddle area of
the Big Island; only general weather information for the vicinity is available. On the eastern
(windward) side of the island, clouds often form over the up-sloping terrain. The skies on the
western side of the island are typically clear or have scattered clouds.
Big Island Air employees indicated that the pilot was responsible for obtaining weather
information before departure. No one at Big Island Air provided the pilot with weather
information for the accident flight, and the FAA has no record of the pilot requesting a weather
briefing for either September 25, 1999, flight.
Three U.S. Geological Survey Biological Resources Division employees observed
weather conditions about 1.75 miles northeast of the accident site on the eastern slope of the
Mauna Loa volcano on September 25, 1999. Two witnesses indicated that about 1445, visibility
was 30 to 200 meters and that the sky was “mostly closed” but began clearing about 1630. Later
that afternoon around the time of the accident, a column of gray smoke was observed to the
southwest. The witnesses indicated that the visibility on the far side of the smoke was “murky”;
however, the smoke column was in clear skies. They indicated that the winds were also very low
at that time. Another witness indicated that the landscape at the area of the smoke column was
not well defined because of the clouds.
10 The maximum allowable takeoff weight for the accident airplane was 7,368 lbs.
NTSB/AAB-01-02

6
A helicopter pilot who was reportedly on the prescribed route indicated that about 1630,
he observed the weather to the north and south of the area near the accident airplane’s route. The
helicopter pilot reported that to the north of the route, the sky was overcast, with ceilings below
500 feet above ground level (agl). To the south of the route, an overcast cloud layer between
5,000 and 7,000 feet msl extended from the east flank of the Mauna Loa volcano toward the
ocean.
Surface Aviation Weather Observations
Hilo International Airport, Hawaii
The closest facility to the accident site that reported aviation weather was the Hilo
International Airport, which has a field elevation of 38 feet msl and is located about 63 degrees at
26 nms from the accident location. On September 25, 1999, about 1706, winds were 100 degrees
at 11 knots; visibility was 10 miles; sky condition was few clouds at 2,300 feet, scattered clouds
at 3,000 feet, broken ceiling at 3,600 feet; temperature was 24 degrees Celsius (C); dew point
was 21 degrees C; and altimeter setting was 29.99 inches mercury (hg). About 1753, winds were
110 degrees at 9 knots; visibility was 10 miles; sky condition was few clouds at 2,400 feet,
scattered clouds at 3,200 feet, broken ceiling at 4,600 feet; temperature was 24 degrees C; dew
point was 21 degrees C; and altimeter setting was 30.01 inches hg.
Keahole-Kona International Airport, Hawaii
The departure airport, KOA, has a field elevation of 47 feet msl and is located about
292 degrees at 35 nms from the accident location. On September 25, 1999, about 1653, wind
was 280 degrees at 7 knots; visibility was 10 miles; sky condition was scattered clouds at
7,500 feet; temperature was 28 degrees C; dew point was 20 degrees C; and altimeter setting was
29.94 inches hg. About 1753, wind was 290 degrees at 5 knots; visibility was 10 miles; sky
condition was clear; temperature was 27 degrees C; dew point was 20 degrees C; and altimeter
setting was 29.96 inches hg.
Non-Aviation Surface Weather Observations
Keaumo, Hawaii, has an elevation of 5,560 feet msl and is located about 107 degrees at
6 nms from the accident location. On September 25, 1999, about 1700, the temperature was
15 degrees C, the relative humidity was 99 percent, and wind was 90 degrees at 2 knots.
The Mauna Loa Observatory has an elevation of 11,140 feet msl and is located about
283 degrees at 6 nms from the accident location. On September 25, 1999, about 1700, the
temperature was 8.8 degrees C, wind was calm, and the dew point was -13.9 degrees C.
About 1800, the temperature was 10.6 degrees C, wind was 321 degrees at 2 knots, and the dew
point was -13.6 degrees C.
Several cameras are located on a 63-foot tower at the Mauna Loa Observatory. Safety
Board staff reviewed camera images from cameras facing north, east, and southwest taken at
NTSB/AAB-01-02

7
10-minute intervals around the time of the accident. This camera imagery was available for
public viewing on the state of Hawaii and the University of Hawaii Web sites on the day of the
accident. (Camera images on the day of the accident were recorded and are attached to the
Meteorological Factual Report.) The camera images showed fog conditions in the vicinity of the
Mauna Loa Observatory with part of the ridgeline of the volcano visible in several photographs.
In addition to the camera imagery that was publicly available on the state of Hawaii and the
University of Hawaii Web sites, the University of Hawaii Web site provided additional
meteorological information for the Mauna Kea volcano area and current WSR-88D radar
depictions from the island, which showed scattered light reflectivity, or mostly clouds.
Airmen’s Meteorological Information
Airmen’s meteorological information (AIRMET) SIERRA for IFR and mountain
obscuration was issued for the Hawaiian area on September 25, 1999, about 1147 (and valid until
1800) and indicated no significant IFR expected. Another AIRMET SIERRA was issued for the
Hawaiian area about 1747 (valid until 0000 on September 26) and again indicated no significant
IFR expected.
AIRMET TANGO for turbulence was issued for the Hawaiian area on September 25,
1999, about 1147 and indicated temporary moderate turbulence below 12,000 feet over and
immediately south through west of mountains for all islands until 1800. Another AIRMET
TANGO was issued for the Hawaiian area about 1747 (valid until 0000 on September 26) and
indicated no significant turbulence was expected.
No significant meteorological information (SIGMET) was issued for the Hawaiian
Islands around the time of the accident.
COMMUNICATIONS
A review of Honolulu AFSS records, including its Daily Record of Facility Operation, air
traffic control tapes and associated transcripts, and personnel statements, indicates that all aids to
navigation associated with the accident pilot’s flight route were in normal operational status
during flight. No evidence indicates that any air-to-ground communications or services were
provided to N411WL after the pilot’s last contact with the AFSS concluded about 1720. No
pilots have reported to Safety Board staff that they had heard or established communication with
the pilot of N411WL during the accident flight.
WRECKAGE INFORMATION
The airplane was destroyed by impact forces and a severe postimpact fire. The initial point
of impact occurred on lava-covered, up-sloping terrain at an approximate elevation of 10,100 feet
msl and was measured by GPS to be 19 degrees 30.823 minutes north latitude, 155 degrees
28.790 minutes west longitude. The final crash site was measured by GPS to be 19 degrees
30.862 minutes north latitude, 155 degrees 28.785 minutes west longitude. All of the wreckage
was found within an area approximately 150 feet in diameter.
NTSB/AAB-01-02

8
All flight control surfaces and structural components were located with the main wreckage
at the accident site. The accident airplane was found inverted with its right wing, empennage,
fuselage remains, and both engine nacelles resting on the lava. The main landing gear was
retracted, and the oleo struts were extended in their respective gear wells. No indication of in-flight
fire was noted. The fuselage was consumed by fire from the nose throughout the airplane to the
horizontal stabilizer. No evidence of failures or in-flight malfunctions of the airplane’s
air/pneumatic systems was found. The electrical systems of the airplane and the cockpit flight
instruments, engine instruments, and avionics control heads were destroyed by impact and
postimpact fire.
The left engine remained partially attached to its wing and had sustained varying degrees of
thermal damage from the postimpact ground fire. The right engine was found attached to its engine
mounts, which were deformed aft and inboard. There was no evidence of mechanical malfunction
or fire of the left or right engines before the accident. On both engines, the propeller blades were
bent in the direction opposite normal rotation. There were rotational scoring signatures at the
turbocharger compressor wheel and shrouds of both engines.
The GPS receiver was destroyed; no data could be recovered. No setting or distance
information was determined from the fire-damaged navigation receivers or from the VOR
receiver. The magnetic compass was also destroyed.
An examination of the airplane’s gyroscopic flight instruments revealed that the damage
signatures were consistent with the impact having occurred while the airplane’s wings were
within 10 degrees of level at zero pitch. The airspeed could not be determined because of the
destruction of the airspeed indicator.
MEDICAL AND PATHOLOGICAL INFORMATION
The FAA’s Toxicology and Accident Research Laboratory manager reported detecting
4.659 ug/ml of phentermine11 in a specimen of liver. The drug was also detected in urine. No
other drugs were found, and no blood specimen was available for analysis.
TESTS AND RESEARCH
Recorded radar data was used to determine the airplane’s rate of climb during the latter
portion of flight. Taking into account the airplane’s gross weight, configuration, and
meteorological conditions, a comparison was made between the rate of climb and the projected
maximum climb performance as listed in the airplane’s FAA-approved Flight Manual
Supplement. The airplane’s rate of climb during the last 1/2 minute of flight was consistent with
the airplane beginning to operate near its maximum (multiengine) climb performance. Radar
data indicates that at that point in flight, the airplane’s track varied little from its predominately
west-northwesterly direction.
11 Phentermine is a prescription stimulant and diet aid in the same drug class as amphetamine, with potential side
effects similar to all drugs in that class, including insomnia, irritability, hyperactivity, personality changes, and
extreme fatigue and depression following acute withdrawal.
NTSB/AAB-01-02

9
OPERATIONS AND MANAGEMENT INFORMATION
The Safety Board reviewed the FAA’s oversight and surveillance records for Big Island
Air for fiscal year 1999. All of the required inspections were reported to be completed, and all
observed deficiencies were reported to be corrected. A further review of PTRS and enforcement
records for the previous 2 years revealed several findings, and the flight standards district office
personnel followed up on the actions. FAA records for Big Island Air revealed no instances of
pilots failing to maintain the minimum required distance from clouds during 1998.
ADDITIONAL INFORMATION
The company has three standard flight plans on file with the Honolulu AFSS. Two plans
cover flights around the circumference of the Big Island of Hawaii, and one plan covers the
roundtrip east-to-west route to the island’s opposite shore via the saddle area between the Mauna
Kea and Mauna Loa volcanoes. Big Island Air’s chief pilot reported that, weather permitting, the
pilot would be expected to conduct the tour flight via the established FAA-approved VFR
routes.12 The pilot’s standard route for the accident flight would typically have been a
circumferential route, flying north from KOA to the Upolu Point at 1,500 feet agl. From the
Upolu Point, the pilot would head eastbound along the north shore toward the Hilo area at
1,000 feet agl. From Hilo, the pilot would proceed south toward the Puu Oo vent and then to the
summit of Kilauea at the caldera.13 The pilot would then return to KOA by proceeding around the
South Point (southern end of the island) and back to KOA via the western shoreline.
Big Island Air’s DO stated that, frequently, pilots do not fly the circumferential route
around the entire island as discussed above. Specifically, rather than flying from the Hilo area to
KOA via the South Point, pilots sometimes fly back to KOA via the saddle route. The DO
indicated that Big Island Air does not have a flight plan covering this half-island tour route.
According to the DO, when pilots depart from a flight plan to circle the island and alter their
course en route by proceeding directly back to KOA via the saddle area, they typically do not
notify AFSS of the change. (Pilots could make this decision during flight because of
meteorological conditions, volcanic activity, or tourist needs.) The DO reported that it was
company policy for pilots to reverse course, as required, to avoid entering IMC. Two Big Island
Air line pilots indicated their understanding and occasional use of this weather avoidance
technique.
SFAR 71 provides operating rules for VFR air tour flights conducted in Hawaii under
14 CFR Part 135. The regulation states that, except during takeoff, landings, and other specific
conditions, no person may conduct an air tour below an altitude of 1,500 feet agl.
In Big Island Air’s FAA-approved Operations Specifications, the operator had received
FAA authorization for a deviation from SFAR 71, permitting the operator to reduce the altitude
12 When on the FAA-approved routes, the pilot could fly at the lowest altitudes permitted by the FAA.
13 A caldera is a large crater formed by volcanic explosion or by collapse of a volcanic cone.
NTSB/AAB-01-02

10
flown at specific locations and transition segments to no lower than 1,000 feet agl only when
specific conditions were met. During flight, the airplane must be at least 500 feet below clouds,
maintain 3 miles flight visibility, and remain within 1/2 nm on either side of the approved
centerline of the approved flight route.
The FAA-approved transition routes were identified in the operator’s SFAR 71 Deviation
Procedure Manual, along with a map on which the respective routes were depicted. The accident
site was approximately 3.5 miles laterally south of the depicted route segment referred to as
segment “V-T,” a portion of which parallels the 9,000-foot elevation topographical contour line.
The POI reported that, to maintain the requisite 1,000-foot agl terrain clearance along this
segment, the pilot would be required to climb to 10,000 feet msl. If the pilot were to fly more
than 1/2 mile south of this segment, a higher altitude would be needed to comply with the terrain
clearance requirements of SFAR 71.
NTSB/AAB-01-02

11
ANALYSIS
The pilot was properly certificated and qualified in accordance with applicable Federal
regulations and company requirements.
The airplane was properly certificated and equipped in accordance with Federal
regulations and approved procedures. No maintenance discrepancies or corrective actions were
noted between the airplane’s last scheduled maintenance activity on August 31, 1999, and the
date of the accident. The airplane had no recently reported maintenance history of
navigation-related problems. Surveillance of Big Island Air by the principal operations inspector
(POI) was consistent with the Federal Aviation Administration’s (FAA) existing guidelines.
On August 30, 1999, 25 days before the accident flight, the pilot completed a
recertification training program after his 11-month leave of absence from Big Island Air’s
employment as a tour pilot. During the FAA-administered flight check, the POI reviewed with
the pilot the requirements of Special Federal Aviation Regulations 71, which provides operating
rules for visual flight rules (VFR)-only air tour flights conducted in Hawaii under 14 Code of
Federal Regulations Part 135. Remarks on the “Airman Competency/Proficiency Check FAR
[Federal Aviation Regulations] 135” form indicate that the pilot completed the requirements
satisfactorily.
Big Island Air’s FAA-approved Operations Specifications and corresponding training
program clearly indicate that all tour flights were to be conducted under VFR; no flying under
instrument flight rules was authorized at any time. The accident pilot had over 11,500 hours of
flight time, most of which was accumulated in the Hawaiian Islands. The pilot was therefore
likely aware of and understood the VFR flight visibility and cloud clearance limitations.
However, on September 4, 1999, 5 days after his recertification training, the accident pilot
performed a tour flight, which was videotaped by a passenger. During the flight, the airplane can
be seen flying in clouds on several occasions and in different locations. Further, witnesses
indicated that on the day of the accident, the sky was overcast in the vicinity of the accident site.
The Safety Board therefore concludes that on the accident flight, the pilot flew into instrument
meteorological conditions (IMC).
The pilot was responsible for but did not obtain a preflight weather briefing from the
FAA’s Honolulu Automated Flight Service Station as required by the FAA. The FAA has no
record of the pilot requesting a weather briefing for the accident flight or the flight he conducted
earlier that day. The Safety Board concludes that the pilot’s failure to obtain a preflight weather
briefing was a deviation from standard operating procedures.
The accident airplane was equipped with very high frequency omni directional range,
distance measuring equipment, and global positioning satellite receivers, which could have been
used to indicate the accident airplane’s position and ground clearance. Although the pilot was
not required to use these navigational aids, when he departed visual meteorological conditions
and flew into IMC, he should have used the navigational aids to accurately monitor his ground
track and altitude. During the last few minutes of flight, when the airplane’s ground clearance
NTSB/AAB-01-02

12
was rapidly decreasing, the pilot did not reverse course or take emergency action. Radar data
indicates that at this point in flight, the airplane’s track varied little from its predominately west-
northwesterly direction. If the pilot had been using his navigational aids correctly, he would have
realized that he was nearing high terrain and would likely have changed his course.
The pilot’s early awakening time and the length of his duty day raise the possibility of
fatigue as a factor in this accident. However, in the absence of further evidence, the Safety Board
cannot conclusively determine whether fatigue was a factor in this accident.
Because no blood sample from the pilot was available for analysis, the impact of the drug
phentermine on pilot’s behavior could not be analyzed or determined.
