CORRECTED COPY: Removed incorrect adopted date from final page
A L
T RAN SPO
R National Transportation Safety Board
N T
O E PLURIBUS UNUM A
I T Washington, D.C. 20594
A T IO
N N
SAFETYBO
AR
D
Aircraft Accident Brief
Accident Number: DCA11PA075
Operator/Flight Number: Omega Aerial Refueling Services, Flight 70
Aircraft and Registration: Boeing 707, N707AR
Location: Point Mugu Naval Air Station, California
Date: May 18, 2011
Adopted: January 2, 2013
HISTORY OF FLIGHT
On May 18, 2011, about 1727 Pacific daylight time,1 a modified Boeing 707, registration
N707AR, operating as Omega Aerial Refueling Services (Omega) flight 70 crashed on takeoff
from runway 21 at Point Mugu Naval Air Station, California (KNTD). The airplane collided with
a marsh area to the left side beyond the departure end of the runway and was substantially
damaged by postimpact fire. The three flight crewmembers sustained minor injuries. The flight
was conducted under the provisions of a contract between Omega and the US Naval Air Systems
Command (NAVAIR) to provide aerial refueling of Navy F/A-18s in offshore warning area
airspace. According to the Federal Aviation Administration (FAA), Omega, and the US Navy, the
airplane was operating as a nonmilitary public aircraft under the provisions of 49 United States
Code Sections 40102 and 40125.
The accident flight crew consisted of a captain, first officer, and flight engineer who had
flown with each other many times previously. The crewmembers reported conducting a normal
preflight inspection. As the airplane taxied toward the runway, the reported wind was from 280º
magnetic at 24 knots, gusting to 34 knots; the flight crew reported that the windsock showed
very little change in the wind direction and a slight amount of gust. The crew had calculated a
takeoff decision speed (V ) of 141 knots and a rotation speed (V) of 147 knots. The crew elected
1 r
to add 5 knots to the rotation speed to compensate for the wind gusts and briefed a maximum
power takeoff. The first officer, who was the pilot monitoring, stated that he advised the captain,
who was the pilot flying, about advancing the power relatively smoothly to avoid a compressor
stall with the crosswind, and the captain agreed.
About 1723, air traffic control cleared the flight for takeoff from runway 21 and
instructed the crew to turn left to a heading of 160º after departure. The captain applied takeoff
thrust, and the first officer told investigators that, as the pilot in the right seat, he applied forward
1 Unless otherwise noted, all times in this brief are Pacific daylight time based on a 24-hour clock.

2
pressure on the yoke and right aileron input to compensate for the right crosswind. According to
the crew, the takeoff roll was normal. At rotation speed, the captain rotated the airplane to an
initial target pitch attitude of 11º airplane nose up. Shortly after liftoff, when the airplane was
about 20 feet above the runway and about 7,000 feet down the runway, all three crewmembers
heard a loud noise and observed the thrust lever for the No. 2 (left inboard) engine rapidly retard
to the aft limit of the throttle quadrant. The captain stated that he applied full right rudder and
near full right aileron to maintain directional control and level the wings, but the airplane
continued to drift to the left. The captain reported that he perceived the airplane would not
continue to climb and decided to “put it back on the ground.”
Witnesses and a cell phone video from another Omega 707 crewmember observing the
takeoff indicated that the No. 2 (left inboard) engine separated and traveled up above the left
wing as the airplane was passing abeam taxiway A2. The inlet cowling for the No. 1 (left
outboard) engine separated immediately thereafter, consistent with being struck by the No. 2
engine nacelle.
The airplane began to descend with the remaining three engine power levers at maximum
power, and the left wing dipped slightly (Pratt & Whitney indicated that loss of the inlet cowling
on the No. 1 engine would increase drag, effectively resulting in less than zero thrust output).
The captain said he lowered the nose and leveled the wings just as the airplane touched down on
the runway between taxiway A2 and A1. The airplane made multiple contacts with the runway
before drifting left and departing the runway surface before the airplane reached taxiway A1. The
airplane crossed taxiway A and came to rest in the marsh area.
According to the flight crewmembers, they observed flames in the cabin area and did not
have time to perform an engine shutdown or evacuation checklist. The crew reported difficulty
exiting the cockpit due to mud and debris blocking the cockpit door. All three crewmembers
successfully evacuated through the left forward entrance via the escape slide.
INJURIES TO PERSONS
The three crewmembers sustained minor injuries.
DAMAGE TO AIRCRAFT
The airplane sustained substantial damage due to impact forces and was partially
consumed by a postcrash fire. See the Wreckage and Impact Information section in this brief for
more information.
OTHER DAMAGE
Minor gouges were observed in the runway surface. The runway arresting gear and
runway signage also sustained minor damage.
FLIGHT CREW INFORMATION
The captain, age 41, was hired by Omega in September 2008 and qualified as captain on
the Boeing 707 shortly after being hired. At the time of the accident, he held an airline transport
NTSB/AAB-13/01

3
pilot certificate with type ratings on the Boeing 707 and 720, BE-200, and A320. He held a
current first-class medical certificate. He reported a total pilot time of 5,117 hours with 2,730 in
the Boeing 707. He was formerly a Navy pilot and flew the Boeing 707 and E6A (a Navy
electronic and reconnaissance airplane based on the Boeing 707 airframe) based in Pensacola,
Florida, and Corpus Christi, Texas. He also flew Beechcraft King Air twin-turboprop aircraft in
Europe, where he was the head Naval Air Training and Operating Procedures Standardization
(NATOPS) instructor on King Air 200s and was an assistant NATOPS instructor on Boeing 707s.
He was a McDonnell Douglas T45 Goshawk instructor in Kingsville, Texas, and worked for
United Airlines as a first officer flying Airbus A320s based in Chicago before being furloughed
in January 2009. He reported flying a few trips on Boeing 707s with Principal Air but had not
flown for that company since October 2010. He flew both internationally and domestically with
Omega. The captain stated he had no major changes in his personal life or financial situation, and
he characterized his overall health as “excellent.” Review of the captain’s preaccident activities
revealed no abnormalities. The accident flight was his first of the day. The captain was current
and qualified under FAA Part 91 and Part 61 requirements. A review of FAA records revealed no
prior accidents, incidents, or enforcement actions.
The first officer, age 45, was hired by Omega in October 2008. He was qualified as
captain, with his time in the Boeing 707 split about equally between serving as captain or first
officer. He reported that, because the majority of pilots at Omega were qualified as captains, they
would take turns flying in that role. The first officer began his flight training with the Navy in
1995, flying Raytheon T-1 Jayhawks, Boeing E6s, and Beechcraft C12s. He had been an
instructor pilot in the E6 and the NATOPS instructor for the C12 in Rota, Spain. The first officer
reported 4,052 hours total time, with 2,900 hours in the Boeing 707. He was dual-qualified for
the McDonnell Douglas DC-10 and the Boeing 707 at Omega, with about 300 hours in the
McDonnell Douglas DC-10. At the time of the accident, the first officer held an FAA airline
transport pilot certificate, with type ratings in the BE-200, 707, 720, and DC-10. He held a
current first-class medical certificate and classified his overall health as “outstanding.” Review
of the first officer’s preaccident activities revealed no abnormalities. The accident flight was his
first of the day. The first officer was current and qualified under FAA Part 91 and Part 61
requirements. A review of FAA records revealed no prior accidents, incidents, or enforcement
actions.
The flight engineer, age 50, was hired by Omega in November 2002. His flight training
began in the US Air Force. He became a flight engineer in 1983 on Lockheed C141Bs at
Andrews Air Force Base and flew Boeing 707s and 747s from 1992 until his retirement in 2002.
At the time of the accident, he was the chief flight engineer at Omega, as well as the acting
assistant facilities security officer; he was previously the facilities security officer. He did not
perform ground or flight training but was dual-qualified on the Boeing 707 and
McDonnell Douglas DC-10. His total time was around 9,000 hours, with 6,500 hours in the
Boeing 707, all of which was as an engineer. He had a private pilot license, with single-engine
instrument rating. He held a current second-class medical certificate. Review of the flight
engineer’s preaccident activities revealed no abnormalities. The accident flight was his first of
the day. The flight engineer was current and qualified under FAA Part 91 and Part 61
requirements. A review of FAA records revealed no prior accidents, incidents, or enforcement
actions.
NTSB/AAB-13/01

4
The flight crewmembers received annual recurrent ground school and simulator training
on the Boeing 707 from Pan Am International Flight Academy in Miami, Florida, and were
trained under 14 Code of Federal Regulations (CFR) Parts 61 (captain and first officer) and 63
(flight engineer).
AIRCRAFT INFORMATION
The accident airplane was a modified Boeing 707-321B, registration number N707AR,
serial number 20029. It was originally constructed in 1969 as a passenger-transport airplane. At
the time of the accident, the airplane had 47,856 total hours with 15,186 total cycles. The
airplane was powered by four Pratt & Whitney JT3D-3B engines. The No. 2 engine (the first to
separate) had accumulated 48,119 hours and 14,576 cycles. Five operators owned the airplane
before Omega acquired it on July 29, 1994.
In 1996, Omega initiated the tanker conversion process in conjunction with BAE Systems
and TRACOR. The tanker conversion employed a centerline refueling station located in the aft
fuselage with dual redundant hoses capable of probe and drogue refueling.2 None of the tanker
conversion changes was in the area of the engine nacelle struts. The US Navy conducted
qualification tests on the modified airplane in 1999 and accepted it as meeting the requirements
for the proposed contract. Omega had flown the airplane a total of 9,811 hours and 2,656 cycles
since purchase, most of which were flown for developing the tanker modification and operating
under the provisions of the US Navy contract.
The weight and balance data for the accident flight were destroyed by the postimpact fire.
National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB) investigators determined estimated weight and
balance information for the accident airplane using the onboard computer of an identical
Boeing 707 (N707MQ) and the weights associated with the accident airplane. The estimated
takeoff weight of the airplane was 304,179 pounds (lbs), with a center of gravity (CG) at
21.5 percent mean aerodynamic chord (MAC). Maximum takeoff weight specified for the
airplane was 331,600 lbs, with a CG range of 17 to 35 percent MAC.
Boeing 707 Engine Nacelle Strut and Previous Events
The No. 2 engine nacelle strut attaches to the wing at four primary locations: an upper
connection, which consists of the overwing support fitting and the front spar fitting; lower
connections, which consist of the lower spar fitting, diagonal brace (thrust link), and the wing aft
drag fitting; and two middle connections, which consist of the midspar and wing drag support
fittings and the vertical attach fittings. As shown in figure 1, the midspar fitting is of a
right-angle configuration in which the vertical tang attaches to the pylon bulkhead and the
horizontal upper and lower tangs sandwich the midspar of the pylon. The lug at the center of the
fitting is attached to the forward drag support fitting on the underside of the wing. Fractures of
the midspar fitting were observed at the upper and lower horizontal tangs (as indicated by the red
and green lines in figure 1) at the radius (indicated by the red arrows), where the tangs merge
with the lug at the fitting’s center.
2 A drogue is a conical basket that is attached to a flexible hose that extends from the tanker; a fixed probe is
inserted into the basket to transfer fuel.
NTSB/AAB-13/01

5
Figure 1. Diagram of a Boeing 707 engine nacelle strut, showing the fracture area on the
midspar fitting.
According to Boeing, before the accident involving N707AR, operators had reported
cracks on more than 45 midspar fittings. The fitting cracks occurred either vertically at the lug
hole or across the double horizontal tangs at the radius where the tangs merge with the lug. At
least three accidents have occurred in which the fatigue cracking led to failure of the fittings and
engine separations.
In March 1992, the No. 3 engine nacelle strut on a Nigeria-registered Trans-Air
Service Boeing 707 separated from the airplane near the top of climb and contacted the No. 4
engine nacelle strut, which also separated from the airplane. The flight crew performed an
emergency landing in France, and the five occupants evacuated the airplane, which was
substantially damaged by fire. One month later, the No. 3 engine nacelle strut on a
Colombia-registered Trans Aeros Mercan Pan Am (TAMPA) Boeing 707 separated from the
airplane and contacted the No. 4 engine nacelle during takeoff. The flight crew was able to
return to the airport and safely land the airplane, which was subsequently repaired and
returned to service.3 Laboratory analysis of the midspar fittings from the 1992 events indicated
that the cracks resulted from stress corrosion and/or fatigue at the lug and tangs. On
November 14, 1998, the No. 3 engine separated from an IAT Cargo Boeing 707 after the airplane
encountered turbulence at 24,000 feet. The flight crew returned to Ostend Airport,
Ostend, Belgium, for an emergency landing during which the airplane overran the runway by
328 feet. The five occupants evacuated the airplane, which was substantially damaged.
3 More information about this accident, NTSB case number MIA92FA115, can be accessed at
http://www.ntsb.gov/aviationquery/index.aspx.
NTSB/AAB-13/01

6
Laboratory analysis revealed a fatigue crack on the inner midspar fitting of the No. 3 engine. The
investigation determined that the No. 3 pylon fittings that failed were of an older design, contrary
to an applicable directive in effect at the time (see the next section).
Service Bulletins and Airworthiness Directives
To address the midspar cracking issue, a series of Boeing service bulletins (SB) and FAA
airworthiness directives (AD) were published between 1975 and 1993, beginning with Boeing
SB 707-3183 (dated June 27, 1975). Subsequently revised and updated (revision 1, dated
May 13, 1977), SB 707-3183 called for an initial inspection of inboard and outboard midspar
fittings on the No. 2 and No. 3 engines, followed by repetitive close visual inspections at varying
flight cycles (depending on airplane configuration) and eventual replacement of the fittings with
an improved design that incorporated larger radii of 1.0 inch in critical areas. Replacing the
fittings was a terminating action for the repetitive inspections. The bulletin also included
instructions to enlarge the pylon access cover over the fitting for better access (for both
inspection and cleaning). Revision 2 of SB 707-3183 (dated January 28, 1988) incorporated
SB 707-3377 (dated November 21, 1979), which gave instructions for the installation of nacelle
droop stripes to facilitate visual detection of broken nacelle support structures, such as midspar
or overwing fittings, by indicating a misalignment between the nacelle strut skin and the
fairing skin. The FAA required the actions recommended in SB 707-3183 and its revisions via
ADs 77-09-03, 88-24-10, 92-19-15,4 and 93-11-02.
Omega records indicated that the company conducted the first visual inspection in 1996,
shortly after the conversion. Omega observed that the AD list for the airplane indicated that
AD 93-11-02 was completed, but inspections per the Boeing SB were entered into the
maintenance program and continued until 2003, when a records review found that, in 1983, a
previous owner/operator had marked the compliance status of the AD in effect at the time
(77-09-03) with “C” (meaning complete).5 This status reconfirmed to Omega that the records
showed the fittings had been replaced and inspections were no longer necessary, and Omega
deleted the inspection requirement from its maintenance plan.6 Following the accident involving
Omega flight 70, an examination of the No. 2 and 3 nacelle struts confirmed that both the
inboard and outboard midspar fittings were of the older design and had not been replaced with
the improved design in accordance with the AD. The examination also noted that droop stripes
had been installed on the accident airplane nacelles, as required by the AD.
Maintenance Program
Omega maintained the airplane to an FAA-approved Boeing maintenance program. In
accordance with FAA Advisory Circular 20-76, “Maintenance Inspection Notes for
4 AD 92-19-15 was issued in response to NTSB Safety Recommendation A-92-38, which asked the FAA to
revise AD 88-24-10 to significantly decrease the times between inspection intervals and require an improved means
of inspection to detect small cracks.
5 According to the status codes in the previous owner/operators records and the requirements in AD 77-09-03,
the compliance status for the AD should have been recorded as “REP” for repetitive. Section 91.417 requires that an
owner selling an aircraft provide the new owner/operator a list of the current status of applicable ADs, including the
dates and methods of compliance, whether a recurring action is involved, and, if so, when the next action is required.
6 Federal regulations do not require an owner/operator acquiring an aircraft to physically verify the compliance
of every AD for which compliance has been recorded.
NTSB/AAB-13/01

7
Boeing B-707/720 Series Aircraft” (dated October 21, 1971), the Omega structural inspection
program consolidated “Boeing 707 Maintenance Planning Document D6-7552 Dec 80”;
“Corrosion Prevention and Control Program D6-54928 Rev E”; “Aging Airframe Service Action
Requirement, Model 707/720 D6-54996 Rev E (Inspection Only)”; and “Supplemental Structural
Inspection Program D6-44860 Rev P.” Compliance with ADs and manufacturer SBs was written
into the program, as applicable. Written records of major repairs did not indicate any work on the
pylons performed by Omega.
Airworthiness Certificate
Due to the nature of the tanker conversions performed on the accident airplane, the FAA
determined that the original airplane transport-category airworthiness certificate was no longer
valid. During the tanker conversion development process, the FAA granted Omega a
supplemental type certificate (STC) for the airplane with the initial part of the tanker
modification, termed the “A-kit,” which comprised certain components permanently installed in
the airplane that have no ability to activate the refueling equipment. Once critical refueling
components, such as control panels, hoses, drogues, and pumps were installed, the provisions of
the airplane’s type certificate and STC no longer applied, and the airplane was given a Special
Airworthiness Certificate, Experimental – Market Surveys. The certificate operating limitations
stated that the airplane’s logbook must note “public aircraft” for any government contract flights
and that operations for compensation or hire are prohibited unless they are conducted under the
public aircraft declaration. Further, the operating limitations authorized air-to-air refueling,
detailed the recording requirements for configuration changes, and specified logbook entries for
changing to and changing back from research and development operations.
Omega used the provisions of the certificate for flight training, demonstrating compliance
for international operations, and maintaining compliance with the provisions of the Navy
contract. A designated airworthiness representative (DAR) renewed the certificate every 90 days
on each of Omega’s contracted airplanes, although, at the time of the accident, FAA regulations
required an annual renewal only. Each renewal required the DAR to visit the airplane and assess
aircraft serviceability and maintenance status. Omega also supplied the status of inspection
items, such as ADs, to the DAR every 90 days for review. Omega was obliged to inform the
Navy of any noncompliance that would prevent the issuance of the certificate. A total of 95 hours
56 minutes (34 cycles) of the airplane’s recorded time was operated solely under the provisions
of the experimental certificate of airworthiness; the remainder of the time was under the
provisions of the Navy contract and public aircraft operations. NAVAIR, which managed the
Omega contract, noted that it understood that the experimental airworthiness certificate did not
hold any regulatory status during the conduct of public aircraft operations but that NAVAIR
would use the provisions of the certificate as part of its oversight program (see Public Aircraft
Operation in the Organizational and Management Information section of this brief for more
information).
NTSB/AAB-13/01

8
METEOROLOGICAL INFORMATION
The KNTD weather observation for 1654 indicated wind from 270º at 22 knots, gusts to
33 knots, visibility at 7 statute miles with scattered clouds at 4,000 feet and 20,000 feet.
Recorded temperature was 16ºC, dew point 9ºC, and sea level barometric pressure was 29.76 Hg.
The automated observation included a remark indicating peak wind of 280º at 36 knots at 1559.
A special observation taken 3 minutes after the accident indicated wind from 280º at
24 knots, gusts to 34 knots, visibility at 7 statute miles with scattered clouds at 5,000 feet.
Temperature was 15ºC, dew point was 9ºC, and sea level barometric pressure was 29.75 Hg.
AIDS TO NAVIGATION
No problems with any navigational aids were reported.
COMMUNICATIONS
No communications problems were noted at any time during the accident sequence.
AERODROME INFORMATION
KNTD is part of Naval Base Ventura County, which also includes Port Hueneme and
San Nicholas Island. The base is about 35 miles west-northwest of Los Angeles, California.
Runway 21 is 11,102 feet long and 200 feet wide, with an asphalt surface and a 900-foot
paved overrun area. The heading for runway 21 is 210º magnetic and 224º true. Runway 21
departures are restricted from turning after departure until reaching an altitude of 500 feet and
0.5 mile offshore.
FLIGHT RECORDERS
Cockpit Voice Recorder
The airplane was equipped with a Sundstrand model V-557 cockpit voice recorder
(CVR), serial number 2942, which can record 30 minutes of analog audio on a continuous loop
tape in a four-channel format: one channel for each flight crewmember and one channel for the
cockpit area microphone. The CVR did not sustain any heat or structural damage. Removal of
the magnetic recording tape from the unit revealed that the tape was broken where it exits the
transport reservoir, before it enters the erase/record head area. The tape was removed from the
transport mechanism and played back on a commercial-grade, reel-to-reel recorder. The audio
information recorded on the tape was extracted from the recorder normally, without difficulty.
None of the audio was pertinent to the accident investigation. The audio was consistent with the
airplane being stationary on the ground at a location other than the accident flight location;
therefore, no transcript was created.
NTSB/AAB-13/01

9
Flight Data Recorder
The flight data recorder (FDR) on board the accident airplane was an LAS 109-C
oscillographic foil-type recorder. Typically for this recorder type, the foil medium is spooled on a
supply reel, spanned over an open strip where styli inscribe data traces, then wound by a take-up
reel. No exposed foil medium was observed when the cartridge was examined in the NTSB
Vehicle Recorder Laboratory. Removal of the top cover revealed that one reel was full of foil and
the other was empty. The full reel had been secured with clear adhesive tape, which indicated
that the recorder was not operating at the time of the accident flight and for an undetermined
time beforehand. Thus, no accident data were recorded on the unit.
Applicable Directives
Certain portions of the Federal Aviation Regulations (FARs) do not apply to public
aircraft operations. Omega’s contract with NAVAIR did not make any mention of voice or data
recorders; however, section C14 stated that “the aircraft must be maintained in accordance with
a[n] FAA approved Maintenance and Inspection Program” and “Each aircraft utilized under this
contract must possess and maintain a[n]…FAA airworthiness certificate.” Certified in the
experimental category, the accident airplane would be operated in accordance with the certificate
and applicable FAA operating regulations, principally 14 CFR Part 91, when not operating under
the NAVAIR contract as a public aircraft operation. Omega did not operate the airplane under the
provisions of 14 CFR Parts 135 or 121.
In accordance with 14 CFR 91.213,7 Omega had a letter of authorization for the accident
aircraft authorizing use of a master minimum equipment list, which stated that the FDR or CVR
may be inoperative provided that the other recorder operates normally and repairs to the
inoperative recorder are made within 3 flight days. On the basis of 14 CFR 91.6098 and the
airplane’s date of manufacture, Omega did not consider the FDR to be a required item on the
airplane. Nonetheless, a recorder operational test consistent with the Boeing Maintenance
Manual was included on the preflight/transit checklist and called for a maintenance check of the
circuit breakers to ensure that the recorder was powered. The maintenance manual for N707AR
also describes a system test that inputs certain parameters and calls for the recorder to be opened
and the foil media observed. According to Omega, this test was never performed on N707AR.
Maintenance records indicate that an FDR check occurred during the last C-check maintenance
in August 2009. The flight engineer checks the CVR during the preflight inspection by activating
7 Title 14 CFR 91.213 states, in part, that “…no person may take off an aircraft with inoperative instruments or
equipment installed unless … The aircraft has within it a letter of authorization (LOA), issued by the FAA Flight
Standards district office having jurisdiction over the area in which the operator is located, authorizing operation of
the aircraft under the Minimum Equipment List.”
8 Title 14 CFR 91.609(c)(1) states that “No person may operate a U.S. civil registered, multiengine,
turbine-powered airplane or rotorcraft having a passenger seating configuration, excluding any pilot seats of 10 or
more that has been manufactured after October 11, 1991, unless it is equipped with one or more approved flight
recorders that utilize a digital method of recording and storing data and a method of readily retrieving that data from
the storage medium.” Section 91.609(e) states that “Unless otherwise authorized by the Administrator, after
October 11, 1991, no person may operate a U.S. civil registered multiengine, turbine-powered airplane or rotorcraft
having a passenger seating configuration of six passengers or more and for which two pilots are required by type
certification or operating rule unless it is equipped with an approved cockpit voice recorder.” The accident airplane
had 24 seats.
NTSB/AAB-13/01

10
an audio test button to observe the volume meter motion. The check does not test the recording
media.
WRECKAGE AND IMPACT INFORMATION
As shown in figure 2, a 4,120-foot debris field began about 7,500 feet from the approach
end of runway 21, near taxiway A2. Main landing gear tire marks indicated that the airplane
regained contact with the runway about 900 feet into the debris field, departed the runway on a
218º heading near taxiway A1, and continued across the grass infield and taxiway A before
coming to rest in a saltwater marsh where it caught fire. The first pieces of wreckage found along
the debris path were a fragment of the No. 2 engine pylon torque bulkhead and a piece of the
No. 2 pylon overwing fitting, located just past taxiway A2. The No. 1 engine nose cowl was
found in the grass infield near taxiway A about 450 feet further into the debris field and left of
the runway surface; it exhibited crush damage consistent with contact with the No. 2 engine. The
No. 2 engine nose cowl was located near the runway arresting gear on the left side of the runway
at the 8,500 foot point. The No. 2 engine was found about 230 feet further, on the left side of the
runway surface. Intermittent scrape marks leading to the No. 2 engine were observed on the
runway beginning about 7,800 feet, consistent with the engine tumbling after separating from the
wing.
Figure 2. Aerial photograph of the debris field.
NTSB/AAB-13/01

11
Fire consumed the top of the cabin and the cockpit (see figure 3). The main wreckage,
which came to rest in the wetland marsh, consisted of the cockpit and cabin; the right wing with
the No. 3 (right inboard) engine partially attached; the empennage; and the inboard half of the
left wing, which sustained thermal damage and was submerged in water. Scattered debris aft of
the main wreckage included the nose gear, remnants of the burned outboard left wing, right main
landing gear truck, and No. 4 (right outboard) engine.
Figure 3. Aerial photograph of airplane wreckage.
The No. 2 pylon separated from the wing at the overwing fitting, the midspar fittings, and
the lower spar fitting. The No. 2 engine remained attached to the pylon. The fracture face on the
upper tang of the inboard midspar fitting displayed a flat smooth surface at the transition from
the upper and lower tangs to the lug. Located in one corner of the rectangular-shaped fracture
face was a dark colored area with a smooth appearance and an arced terminus (thumbnail),
consistent with fatigue propagation. The fatigue region was located at the upper inboard corner
of the upper tang. A portion of the pylon containing all of the midspar fitting fracture faces and
the mating section of the inboard midspar fitting, including the fatigue region, was recovered for
detailed examination at the NTSB’s Materials Laboratory (see the Tests and Research section of
this brief for more information).
The No. 1 pylon separated from the wing at the forward end of the overwing fitting, the
midspar fittings, and the lower spar fitting. The No. 1 engine separated from the pylon at the
NTSB/AAB-13/01

12
forward and aft mounting points. All of the examined fracture surfaces had features consistent
with overstress, with no evidence of fatigue.
The No. 4 (right outboard) engine was found attached to its pylon. The cowlings, except
for the inlet cowl, appeared intact. The No. 3 engine was found with the airplane fuselage at the
main wreckage site, partially attached to the airplane’s right wing.
MEDICAL AND PATHOLOGICAL INFORMATION
The accident flight crew was transported to Ventura County Hospital following the
accident. According to a statement provided by the attending physician, no postaccident drug or
alcohol screening was conducted on the flight crew. Federal regulations do not require such
testing for public aircraft operations.
SURVIVAL ASPECTS
The flight crew observed flames in the cabin area and reported that they did not have time
to perform an engine shutdown or evacuation checklist. They exited the cockpit with difficulty
due to mud and debris blocking the cockpit door and evacuated through the left forward entrance
via the escape slide. Airport rescue and firefighting personnel arrived after the crew had exited
and proceeded to suppress the postcrash fire.
TESTS AND RESEARCH
Metallurgy
The Nos. 1 and 2 engine pylon fitting components were brought to the NTSB Materials
Laboratory for examination. Metallurgical examination revealed that the No. 1 pylon-to-engine
bolts, the No. 1 engine pylon-to-wing fittings, and the No. 2 engine pylon-to-wing fittings all
failed in an overload event with the exception of the upper and lower tangs of the inboard
midspar fitting on the No 2. pylon, which failed due to fatigue.
The upper tang of the No. 2 pylon inboard midspar fitting failed in the reduced section
between the lug where the drag support fitting was normally attached and the chromium-coated
radius, with the fatigue initiating at its upper inboard corner and occupying approximately
15 percent of the fracture surface. Corrosion product covered the fatigue fracture surface,
consistent with it being exposed to the atmosphere for a significant time. Chemical cleaning of
the fatigue fracture surface revealed that mechanical damage had obliterated any fatigue fracture
features that may have been generated in the upper inboard corner and the corrosion product had
obliterated any fine fatigue features, such as striations, leaving only vestiges of crack arrest
marks. The lack of striations prevented a striation count analysis. The cleaning procedure also
revealed surface fissures on the fatigue fracture surface that were oriented parallel to arc-shaped
crack arrest marks and are consistent with high-stress, low-cycle fatigue propagation.
Chromium electroplated coating had been applied to the upper tang radii, and machining
marks in the coating adjacent to the fracture face indicated that a machining operation had been
performed after the electroplating. It is probable that the machining operation was intended to
remove any excess coating that might have interfered with the fit of the lug in the drag support
NTSB/AAB-13/01

13
fitting. The examination noted that machining marks would have intersected with the inner edge
of the fracture face at the inboard upper corner and may have been the fatigue initiator, but
mechanical damage in the corner prevented a determination.
The lower tang of the No. 2 pylon inboard midspar fitting failed in the inboard
chromium-plated radius with the fatigue initiating at multiple locations in the upper portion of
the inboard edge and occupying approximately 1 percent of the fracture face.
The plated radii in the No. 2 pylon midspar fittings were measured at a nominal
0.38 inch, identifying them as the older style fittings that should have been replaced in
accordance with the effective AD. The new midspar fittings have radii of 1.0 inch.
ORGANIZATIONAL AND MANAGEMENT INFORMATION
The Company
Omega Aerial Refueling Services is headquartered in Alexandria, Virginia, and conducts
commercial in-flight refueling services under contract to the US Navy. Omega Air Inc.,
headquartered in San Antonio, Texas, owns the accident airplane and associated support
equipment and has a contractual agreement with Omega to supply the equipment in support of
the Navy contract.
At the time of the accident, Omega used two Boeing 707-300s and a McDonnell Douglas
DC-10 specially converted for probe and drogue air-to-air refueling, which is the method most
used by Navy tactical aircraft.
Navy Contract
From 2001 to 2004, Omega operated tankers for the US Navy as a subcontractor to Flight
International/L-3Com, which had an existing Navy contract flying Learjets. In 2004, Omega was
created to manage most aspects of the refueling program and to enable future growth in the
market. The Department of the Navy was the main customer for Omega via a commercial air
services (CAS) contract managed by NAVAIR. According to the contract work performance
statement, CAS
[P]rovides contractor owned and operated aircraft to United States Navy (USN)
Fleet customers and other Department of Defense (DoD) agencies for tanking of
USN and other US Government agencies, in support of Foreign Military Sales
(FMS) cases, Government contractors and other CAS aircraft capable of in air
refueling.
The Navy contract was also expanded or amended as necessary to cover Omega refueling
activity in support of joint training with Royal Australian Air Force F/A-18 Hornets, UK Royal
Air Force GR-4A Tornadoes, and Canadian Air Force CF-18s. The contract specified that “each
aircraft utilized under this contract must possess and maintain a Federal Aviation Administration
(FAA) airworthiness certificate” and the “aircraft must be maintained in accordance with a FAA
approved Maintenance and Inspection Program.”
NTSB/AAB-13/01

14
Public Aircraft Operation
Omega and NAVAIR representatives indicated during the NTSB’s investigation that the
accident airplane was operated as a public aircraft at all times when operating under the
provisions of the Navy contract. NAVAIR recognized that the airplane was not on an exclusive
use lease and could be operated outside the contract under the FAA experimental certificate and
civil FAA regulations. After qualification in 1999 and receipt of the Experimental–Market
Surveys airworthiness certificate, Omega finalized the Navy contract. Omega understood that the
FAA’s position at that time was that aerial refueling flights could not be operated in accordance
with FARs and, therefore, had to be flown under the provisions of the public aircraft statute. The
Navy also understood that a commercial operation with an experimental certificate could not be
conducted within the provisions of the FARs. Subsequent meetings and discussions in the
mid-2000s between the FAA, Navy, and others, concluded that the Omega operation could
continue unchanged, although various parties expressed concern over the division of oversight
and use of the “Market Surveys” certificate type.
On March 23, 2011, the FAA published a proposed rules notice in the Federal Register
stating its policy that “ALL contracted operations [are presumed] to be civil aircraft operations,
unless the contracting government entity provides the operator with a written declaration (from
the contracting officer or higher-level official) of public aircraft status for designated, qualified
flights.” In July and September 2011, in response to FAA requests, NAVAIR provided letters
stating that the Omega tankers were operated as public aircraft when operating under the Navy
contract.
Safety Oversight
The FAA noted that public aircraft operations are “generally exempt from compliance
with the Federal Aviation Regulations” and that “the status of an aircraft as ‘public aircraft’ or
‘civil aircraft’ depends on its use in government service and the type of operation that the aircraft
is conducting at the time.” In response to an NTSB request, the FAA concluded that the N707AR
operation was “a public aircraft operation within the meaning of the statute, the positions of the
parties, and…FAA guidance material.”
NAVAIR confirmed that it assumes safety oversight responsibility for contracted aircraft
engaging in public aircraft operations. To exercise an appropriate level of safety oversight,
NAVAIR stated it had been “leveraging the processes identified and defined in the DoD Defense
Contract Management Agency Instruction 8210.1,”9 as well as the FAA engineering, inspection,
and oversight standards associated with the experimental certificate, which NAVAIR requires by
contract. Both NAVAIR and Omega acknowledged that the experimental certificate was not
binding in a legal or regulatory manner under public aircraft operations but that they used it as
part of the overall oversight program. Further, NAVAIR stated that it performed a gap analysis in
safety provisions related to refueling and added additional operational guidelines and
requirements as deemed appropriate to ensure the public aspects of the refueling mission were
adequately addressed through the contract with Omega.
9 Defense Contract Management Agency Instruction 8210.1 “establishes requirements for ground and flight
operations involving all contracted work performed on aircraft where [the] instruction is incorporated as a contract
requirement, as well as procedures to be followed by government flight representatives.”
NTSB/AAB-13/01

15
ADDITIONAL INFORMATION
Boeing 707 Accident History
The first flight of the Boeing 707 occurred in 1954. In all, 858 Boeing 707s were
produced (-100, -200, -300, and E3 series), and production ended in 1991. There have been
145 fatal hull-loss accidents involving the Boeing 707, and 11 nonfatal hull-loss accidents.
Boeing reported five previous occurrences of pylon separation; on two of those occasions, an
inboard engine separated and collided with the outboard nacelle, as was the case in this accident.
Safety Changes
Boeing Alert Service Bulletin (ASB) 707-00A3537-00, issued on January 30, 2012, gives
instructions to inspect for the correct engine No. 2 and 3 nacelle strut midspar fittings and to
perform immediate replacement if the wrong fitting is found. The ASB also calls for application
of a droop stripe, inspection of the engine Nos. 1, 2, 3, and 4 nacelle struts for droop, and a
high-frequency eddy current inspection for any crack of the visible lug area of the inboard and
outboard strut midspar fittings (new design) on the No. 2 and 3 engines. A drooped nacelle strut
indicates that a midspar fitting may have fractured. Installation of an incorrect midspar fitting
can result in a fatigue crack, which can cause the fitting to fracture. A fractured midspar fitting
can result in a separation of the nacelle strut and engine from the airplane in flight. On
August 17, 2012, the FAA published AD 2012-16-12, effective September 21, 2012, requiring
the provisions of ASB 707-00A3537-00.
NTSB/AAB-13/01

16
ANALYSIS
There were no relevant anomalies during the preflight check and taxi of the accident
airplane. On the takeoff roll, shortly after liftoff, the No. 2 engine pylon separated from the left
wing. The No. 2 engine nacelle and pylon assembly struck the No. 1 engine nacelle, causing the
No. 1 engine inlet cowl to separate, which degraded the engine’s ability to produce thrust and
resulted in a significant loss of thrust on the left side of the airplane. The captain decided to reject
the takeoff and attempt to land on the remaining runway. The loss of thrust from both left engines
made it highly unlikely that the airplane would be able to continue with a successful takeoff and,
considering the possibility of serious structural damage, the pilot’s decision to reject the takeoff
was appropriate and properly executed.
The No. 2 engine pylon midspar fitting had a preexisting fatigue crack that had propagated
to a critical length before or during the accident flight takeoff. The fatigue crack initiated at the
upper inboard corner of the reduced section between the lug where the drag support fitting is
normally attached and the chromium-coated radius. Corrosion product covered the fatigue
fracture surface, consistent with it being exposed to the atmosphere for a significant time. The
reduced section radius was measured and found to be a nominal 0.38 inch. The 0.38-inch radius
is consistent with an older fitting design that was subject to a series of Boeing SBs and FAA ADs
calling for repetitive visual inspections and eventual replacement with a more fatigue-resistant
design incorporating a 1.0-inch radius. Replacing the older fitting design was a terminating
action for the repetitive inspections.
Omega records indicated that the company conducted visual inspections in 1996 shortly
after the conversion. Omega observed that the AD list for the airplane indicated that
AD 93-11-02 was completed, but inspections per the Boeing SB were entered into the
maintenance program. Omega continued to conduct the inspections until 2003, when a records
review found that, in 1983, a previous owner/operator had marked the compliance status of the
effective AD with “C” (meaning complete). This status reconfirmed to Omega that the records
showed the fittings had been replaced and inspections were no longer necessary, and Omega
deleted the inspection requirement from its maintenance plan. The records review and
termination of the repetitive inspections based on the completion entry were in accordance with
applicable practice and regulations. If the erroneous entries had not been made, Omega would
have either continued its inspections of the midspar fitting or noted the termination requirement
in AD 93-11-02 and replaced the older design fittings, thereby avoiding the accident. Although
an experimental airworthiness certificate had been issued for the airplane and it mostly operated
under the statute governing public aircraft operations, there were no additional or different civil
airworthiness or operating requirements that would have led to a specific inspection of the
fittings to verify compliance with the AD once the maintenance record reflected the completed
status for the AD.
At least three accidents have been associated with failures of the 0.38-inch-radius fitting.
Failure due to a fatigue crack in the midspar fittings on the No. 3 engine nacelle strut was noted
in the investigation of the November 14, 1998, accident involving an IAT cargo Boeing 707 at
Ostend, Belgium. The investigation revealed that the No. 3 pylon fittings that failed were the
older design, contrary to the applicable AD (93-11-02) in effect at the time. The April 25, 1992,
accident involving a Colombia-registered TAMPA Boeing 707 was attributed partly to “the
NTSB/AAB-13/01

17
inadequate inspection requirements of the manufacturer and the FAA to detect cracks in the
midspar fitting.” The Bureau d’Enquêtes et d’Analyses pour la Sécurité de l’Aviation Civile
investigation of a March 1992 engine separation accident involving a Trans-Air Service
Boeing 707 also noted that the required “periodic monitoring of the midspar fitting proved to be
insufficiently effective” and recommended redesigned fittings.
