A L
T RAN SPO
R National Transportation Safety Board
N T
O E PLURIBUS UNUM A
I T Washington, D.C. 20594
A T IO
N N
SAFETYBO
AR
D
Aircraft Accident Brief
Accident Number: LAX04FA075
Aircraft and Registration: Learjet 24B, N600XJ
Location: Helendale, California
Date: December 23, 2003
Adopted On: May 23, 2006
HISTORY OF FLIGHT
On December 23, 2003, about 0913 Pacific standard time,1 a Learjet 24B, N600XJ,
registered to and operated by Pavair, Inc., of Santa Monica, California, departed controlled flight
and crashed near Helendale, California. The captain and the first officer were killed, and the
airplane was destroyed. The flight was operating under the provisions of 14 Code of Federal
Regulations (CFR) Part 912 from San Bernardino County Airport (CNO), Chino, California, to
Friedman Memorial Airport, Hailey, Idaho. Visual meteorological conditions prevailed for the
flight, which operated on an instrument flight rules flight plan.
A review of radar data3 and air traffic control (ATC) transcripts revealed that the flight
departed CNO about 0858 and was cleared to climb to an altitude of 29,000 feet mean sea level
(msl).4 About 0909:55, as the airplane was climbing through an altitude of 26,000 feet, the first
officer requested a return to CNO. About 0910:01, the controller asked the first officer if he
needed to declare an emergency, and the first officer replied that he did not.5 The controller then
directed the flight crew to maintain an altitude of 24,000 feet.
Mode C information6 for the flight showed that, from about 0910:12 to about 0910:59,
the airplane descended from 26,500 to 24,000 feet at a rate of about 2,000 feet per minute (fpm).
About 0911:08, the controller cleared the flight directly to HECTOR (a navigation fix) and asked
the first officer to confirm that the airplane was in level flight at an altitude of 24,000 feet. The
first officer did not respond. Radar data showed the airplane descending through 23,000 feet at a
rate of about 6,500 fpm about that time. About 0911:24, while the airplane was descending at a
1 Unless otherwise noted, all times in this brief are Pacific standard time.
2 Pavair did not hold a 14 CFR Part 135 operating certificate; therefore, the company’s flights were restricted to
Part 91 operations.
3 These data were from the Southern California Air Route Surveillance Radar and the U.S. Air Force 84th Radar
Evaluation Squadron.
4 Unless otherwise noted, all altitudes in this brief are reported as msl.
5 National Transportation Safety Board investigators compared the first officer’s voice in this transmission with
his voice in transmissions that he made earlier in the flight. The investigators noted that his voice sounded similar in
this and previous transmissions.
6 Mode C is a function of the transponder that provides altitude information to air traffic controllers.

2
rate of about 10,000 fpm, the first officer stated, “we’re declaring an emergency now.”7 No
further transmissions were received from the airplane. No radar data were available after about
0911:35. Starting about 0911:47, mode C information was invalid. The airplane impacted high
desert terrain (an elevation of 3,350 feet) about 3 miles southeast of Helendale. The accident site
was located about 46 nautical miles (nm) north of CNO.
A witness to the accident, who was located about 4.5 miles northwest of the accident site,
stated that, after hearing the sound of a jet flying high overhead, he looked up and observed the
accident airplane flying straight and level below a high, overcast cloud layer. He stated that the
airplane then pitched “nose down a little” and “straightened again.” He also stated that, shortly
thereafter, he observed the airplane’s nose pitch “straight down” until it impacted terrain. The
witness reported that he did not notice whether the airplane was rotating about its longitudinal
axis during the descent, but he did indicate that the airplane appeared to be intact without any
components separating from the airplane during the descent. The witness added that he did not
observe any smoke or fire before the airplane impacted terrain and that the airplane exploded
into a “mushroom cloud” when it impacted terrain.
San Bernardino County firefighters, who were performing controlled burns near the
accident site, reported hearing an explosion about the time of the accident. The firefighters
reported that they looked toward the direction of the explosion and saw a rising smoke cloud.
None of the firefighters observed the airplane before the sound of the explosion. The firefighters
drove to the accident site and were the first to arrive there. The firefighters extinguished small
fires that had erupted as a result of the crash.
PERSONNEL INFORMATION
The Captain
The captain, age 51, held an airline transport pilot (ATP) certificate (issued on
October 13, 1987)8 with a multiengine land rating and type ratings in the Cessna 500 (Citation)
and the Learjet.9 The captain also held a commercial certificate with a single-engine land rating
and a flight instructor certificate with single- and multiengine land and instrument ratings. The
captain’s most recent Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) first-class airman medical
certificate was issued on October 1, 2003, with the limitation that he must wear corrective lenses
to correct his near vision.
The captain’s résumé indicated that he had been a Learjet and Cessna 500 captain, a
flight instructor, and director of operations for an aircraft charter company from October 1985 to
7 Safety Board investigators noted that the first officer’s voice during this transmission sounded agitated and
highly distressed compared with his voice during earlier transmissions.
8 On April 13 and 25, 2002, the captain received “altitude awareness” faults during Cessna 500 checkrides. On
September 9, 2002, the captain satisfactorily completed an ATP recheck in a Cessna 500 and was able to maintain
his ATP certificate.
9 The Learjet model was not specified on the type rating, which was issued in May 1988, or identified on the
captain’s Federal Aviation Administration Form 8410-2, Airman Certificate and/or Rating Application, for the
Learjet.
NTSB/AAB-06/04

3
2000. The captain occasionally worked for the owner of XtraJet, Inc.,10 as a pilot but did not
appear to be an employee (no hiring record could be found). During the course of the
investigation, the National Transportation Safety Board was unable to locate any logbooks for
the captain.
The Safety Board obtained information about the captain’s flight hours from American
Air Network (AAN), where he received training.11 A pilot summary, which was signed by the
captain and dated October 6, 2003, indicated that, at that time, he had accumulated 11,783 total
flight hours, about 7,900 hours of which were as pilot-in-command of Learjet airplanes.
According to XtraJet’s former director of operations, the captain completed initial Learjet 24
training at AAN because Pavair did not have an approved Learjet 24 training program. Further,
the captain began recurrent Learjet 24 training at AAN but did not complete the training because
the Learjet 24 was removed from AAN’s operating certificate in November 2003.
The First Officer
The first officer, age 23, held a commercial pilot certificate (issued on November 8,
2002) with single-engine and multiengine land and instrument ratings. He also held a flight
instructor certificate for single-engine land and instrument airplanes. His most recent FAA first-
class airman medical certificate was issued on September 5, 2003, with no limitations.
According to the first officer’s September 4, 2003, pilot summary for AAN, he had
accumulated 250 total flight hours. On October 25, 2003, the first officer completed AAN’s
basic indoctrination and emergency situation and procedures training for the Learjet 25 and 35.
From November 3 to 17, 2003, he completed Learjet 35/36 training at FlightSafety International.
This training consisted of 50 hours of ground training, 15 hours of briefing/debriefing training,
and 24 hours of simulator training. On November 17, 2003, the first officer completed 4 hours of
ground training and 2 hours of simulator differences training in Learjet 20 series airplanes.
According to AAN personnel, the first officer received Learjet 20 series differences training so
that he could fly those airplanes as second-in-command to build his flight time experience.
The first officer was listed as an approved pilot on AAN’s Part 135 operating certificate
on November 7, 2003, and, on the same day, he was given an airmen proficiency check in a
Learjet 35A simulator in accordance with 14 CFR 135.293, “Initial and Recurrent Pilot Testing
Requirements.” A review of AAN’s duty and flight time records revealed that the first officer
flew 4.3 and 19.9 hours in a Learjet 35A in November and December 2003, respectively.
10 XtraJet is an FAA-approved charter company with a 14 CFR Part 135 operating certificate. Pavair and
XtraJet are owned by the same individual and use the same staff.
11 AAN is a Part 135 certificate holder and an aircraft management company that arranges lease agreements for
airplanes and flight crews and charges managerial service fees to operate the airplanes under the company’s Part 135
certificate.
NTSB/AAB-06/04

4
AIRPLANE INFORMATION
General Information
The accident airplane, serial number 190, was manufactured in April 1969, in Wichita,
Kansas. The airplane was equipped with two General Electric CJ-610-6 turbine engines and was
operated and maintained in the United States until 1977. From 1977 to 1981, the airplane was in
Europe. In 1981, the airplane returned to the United States, where it was operated and
maintained until the time of the accident.
At the time of the accident, the airplane was registered to and operated by Pavair. The
airplane was listed on AAN’s 14 CFR Part 135 operating certificate from March 9, 2001, to
November 17, 2003; at which time, the airplane was removed from the company’s operating
certificate. According to AAN, the airplane was removed from its operating certificate because
Pavair had provided inadequate maintenance records.
The Safety Board requested a copy of all maintenance records for the accident airplane
from Pavair and XtraJet. The airframe logbook from 1969 to October 1973 and the left engine
logbook from 1981 to December 1998 were not provided to the Board. Further, no maintenance
logbooks from April 1999 to the time of the accident were provided to the Board.
Maintenance Actions
The accident airplane was maintained by Jet Executive Transport Technologies (JETT) in
Chino.12 JETT provided the Safety Board with copies of its invoices and endorsements for the
accident airplane from October 15, 2000, to December 19, 2003. According to JETT’s
maintenance records, on November 23, 2002, the accident airplane underwent 300- and 600-hour
inspections in accordance with AAN’s approved airworthiness inspection program. At the time
of these inspections, the airplane had accumulated 9,439 total flight hours. The records also
indicated that, on October 17, 2003, the left engine underwent a hot-section inspection. At the
time of the inspection, the engine had accumulated 7,675 total flight hours (6,702 cycles),13 and
the airplane had accumulated 9,507 total flight hours.
XtraJet provided copies of the aircraft flight logs, flight manifests, and discrepancy logs
to the Safety Board. The records were dated from February 27 to April 17, 2003. No
discrepancies were noted. According to JETT maintenance personnel, the accident airplane was
out of service from July to mid-October 2003 because the airplane’s avionics were being
replaced.
JETT also provided a major repair and alteration form (FAA Form 337), dated
October 29, 2003, which revealed that all installed communication, navigation, and transponder
equipment was removed and replaced with new components. The newly installed equipment
12 JETT was formerly known as Executive Aviation Logistics.
13 A cycle is one complete landing and takeoff sequence.
NTSB/AAB-06/04

5
included a global navigation system, communication radios, transponders, radio magnetic
indicators, distance measuring equipment, a horizontal situational indicator, a computer, and a
control panel. According to JETT maintenance personnel, the new navigation system was
coupled to the autopilot. The form was not signed, but a review of the form revealed that the
airplane was inspected in a manner prescribed by the FAA and was approved by Xtrajet’s
FAA-approved inspector. The form had not been submitted to the FAA, as required by 14 CFR
Part 43, Appendix B.
According to JETT, on the morning of the accident, the airplane’s left battery was
inoperative. JETT maintenance personnel took the left battery from a Learjet 25B and used it to
replace the accident airplane’s inoperative battery. No maintenance endorsement was provided
for this work.
Right Engine Discrepancy History
According to XtraJet, JETT, and FAA personnel, on November 26, 2003, during a flight
from Las Vegas, Nevada, to Mesa, Arizona, the accident airplane’s right engine flamed out. The
pilot was able to relight the engine during the descent to Mesa, and the airplane landed without
incident. A JETT mechanic was flown to Mesa to examine the airplane. The cause of the
flameout could not be determined, and the airplane was flown to CNO on November 29, 2003.
During the flight, the right engine flamed out again. The pilot of the flight diverted the airplane
to Palm Springs, California, and made an uneventful landing. The engine was examined by
another maintenance facility, and the cause of the flameout once again could not be determined.
According to the Riverside Flight Standards District Office (FSDO), an airworthiness
inspector followed up on the airplane’s engine issue and asked Pavair to provide him with the
airplane’s maintenance records. Because Pavair did not provide the inspector with the accident
airplane’s maintenance records, he placed an aircraft condition notice on the airplane on
December 12, 2003, that indicated the following:
Operation of this aircraft may be in violation of FAR [Federal Aviation
Regulations] 91.409, FAR 91.417, and FAR 91.419. The airplane owner is asked
to provide for review to the Riverside FSDO: 1. Aircraft maintenance records for
the past 2 years, 2. List of complied ADs [airworthiness directives]. Owner shall
provide the data for review no later than 12/29/2003.
On December 22, 2003 (the day before the accident), JETT maintenance personnel tried
to contact the airworthiness inspector who had placed the condition notice on the airplane. He
was not in the office, so they spoke with another Riverside FSDO airworthiness inspector.
According to this inspector, JETT reported (on behalf of Pavair) that it had complied with the
limitations of the condition notice; therefore, he verbally released the airplane for operations.14
However, the investigation revealed that Pavair’s maintenance records for the accident airplane
were never received by the Riverside FSDO.
14 FAA Order 8300.10, Volume 3, Chapter 124, refers to the issuance of aircraft condition notices. The chapter
provides no guidance on release of airplanes for operation.
NTSB/AAB-06/04

6
METEOROLOGICAL INFORMATION
Meteorological data were obtained from the Daggett and Palmdale, California,
Automated Surface Observing Systems (ASOS). About 0853, the Daggett ASOS reported that
winds were calm, visibility was 10 statute miles, clouds were few at 10,000 feet above the
ground, the temperature was 7º Celsius (C), the dew point was -3º C, and the altimeter setting
was 30.10 inches of mercury (Hg). About 0854, the Palmdale ASOS reported that winds were
from 100º at 4 knots, visibility was 10 statute miles, skies were clear, the temperature was 7º C,
the dew point was -2º C, and the altimeter setting was 30.11 inches of Hg.
The closest upper air sounding (that is, a vertical profile of atmospheric conditions) was
from San Diego, California (110 nm south of the accident site). According to the 0400 sounding,
at an altitude of 24,000 feet, winds were from 235º at 35 knots.
Weather Surveillance Radar depicted no precipitation radar returns near the accident site.
No in-flight weather advisories were in effect surrounding the time of the accident.
At the time of the accident, two AIRMETs (Airman’s Meteorological Information) were
in effect for the accident area. One AIRMET indicated moderate turbulence between 18,000 and
38,000 feet. The other AIRMET indicated occasional moderate rime or mixed ice in clouds and
precipitation between the freezing level, which sloped between 10,000 feet in the north and
12,000 feet in the south.
FLIGHT RECORDERS
The airplane was not equipped with a cockpit voice recorder or a flight data recorder and
was not required by Federal regulations to be so equipped.
WRECKAGE AND IMPACT INFORMATION
The accident site was located in high desert terrain (an elevation of 3,350 feet) about
3 miles southeast of Helendale.
The accident airplane was severely fragmented. The accident site consisted of an impact
crater located on the top of a ridgeline with a circular debris field measuring about 0.3 mile in
diameter. The impact crater measured 43 feet long by 17 feet wide and was between 24 and
30 inches deep. The Safety Board accounted for all flight controls at the accident site. Because
the flight controls were severely fragmented and deformed, flight control continuity could not be
established. The engines were found fractured into numerous sections, which were scattered
throughout the debris field.
The only cockpit and cabin components that could be positively identified were an
oxygen mask, seat components, window frames, Plexiglas pieces, main entry door components,
NTSB/AAB-06/04

7
excerpts from flight logs, weight and balance calculation sheets, and a binder containing
Jeppesen charts. No remnants of flight instruments could be located.
Wreckage Examinations
The wreckage was collected and transported to Aircraft Recovery Services, Littlerock,
California, where it was laid out and examined by a Safety Board investigator and Bombardier
Learjet representatives. No evidence of in-flight fire damage or soot patterns was found.
Components that would normally be positioned adjacent to each other in the airplane displayed
contradictory soot and heat signatures.
The flight control actuating components were destroyed. All systems (including
atmospheric, oxygen, electrical, flight control, navigation, communications, hydraulic, fire
suppression, fuel, and engine) were destroyed, and no system continuity or functionality could be
confirmed.
The left and right engines sustained severe accordion crushing along the longitudinal
axis. Numerous rotor and stator blades were separated from their roots. The blades were flattened
against each other and were mated to other stator and rotor blades along the engine’s airflow
path.
An examination of the electrical wire components revealed that some of the wire bundles
sustained fire damage but that none displayed molten metal or fused components, which would
have indicated a shorted condition. The fracture ends of various wire bundles were examined.
The separated wire areas displayed necking deformation in a rounded manner that was indicative
of a tensile failure. The external surfaces of the wire strands contained soot, but, after removing
the soot, the wire strands were shiny.
MEDICAL AND PATHOLOGICAL INFORMATION
The San Bernardino County Sheriff’s Office, Coroner Division, could not perform a
complete autopsy examination for either pilot because of the condition of their remains. The
coroner determined that the cause of death for the pilots was massive blunt force trauma.
The Civil Aerospace Medical Institute, Oklahoma City, Oklahoma, conducted a
toxicological examination on a tissue specimen from the captain. The tissue tested negative for
alcohol and other performance-impairing drugs. A tissue specimen from the first officer could
not be obtained.
NTSB/AAB-06/04

8
TESTS AND RESEARCH
Actuator Examinations
Two flap actuators, one spoiler actuator, one rudder trim actuator, one landing gear door
actuator, and the horizontal stabilizer actuator were recovered from the wreckage and shipped to
Learjet’s facility in Wichita, Kansas, for further examination under the FAA’s supervision.
According to Learjet, at the time of impact, the flap actuators were in the retracted
position. The damage to the spoiler actuator prevented the determination of a definitive impact
position, but Learjet stated that the actuator was either deployed to 1.5º or stowed. The rudder
trim was found in the near-neutral position. Impact damage prevented the determination of the
position of the landing gear door actuator.
The horizontal stabilizer actuator’s upper attachment rod end, which attaches to the
horizontal stabilizer, was detached from the actuator. The U-bolt, which is installed over the rod
end, was still attached to the actuator at one end. The lower attachment lug, which attaches to the
vertical stabilizer, was also detached from the actuator. Examination of the fracture surfaces
revealed 45º shear lips and irregular fracture features. No evidence of fatigue or cracking was
noted during a microscopic examination.
The horizontal stabilizer’s actuator jackscrew dustcover was pressed into the jackscrew
threads. A 3.2-inch portion of the jackscrew extended from the nut. The extended portion of the
screw was bent and fractured at the screw and nut interface. A measurement of the nut showed
that the overall length of the actuator was stretched by 0.30 inch (the original overall length of
the actuator was 9.89 inches). The screw and nut were examined for evidence of galling or
abnormal wear, but none was found. The screw and stop were installed in accordance with
Learjet’s recommended positions.
A slot and small window were milled into the body of the cylindrical nut to view the
location of the screw stop in relation to the nut threads. The distance from the mechanical stop to
the fully extended position was 0.812 inch, which corresponded to a horizontal stabilizer position
of -1.8º nose down. According to Learjet, with this trim setting and the airplane’s estimated
weight and balance at the time of departure, the airplane would have been trimmed for a
calibrated airspeed of 285 knots (± 25 knots calibrated airspeed).
Air Traffic Control Sound Spectrum Study
The Safety Board conducted an ATC sound spectrum study on all of the radio
transmissions from the accident airplane. The frequency response of the first officer’s headset,
the accident airplane’s radios, and the Los Angeles Air Route Traffic Control Center’s recording
system prevented background sound signatures associated with the airplane’s systems and
engines from being recorded during any of the transmissions associated with the accident flight.
NTSB/AAB-06/04

9
Aircraft Performance Study
The Safety Board examined the FAA’s radar data and computed the accident airplane’s
calibrated airspeed and Mach number throughout the flight. Review of the radar data revealed
that the airplane’s airspeed continued to increase after the pilots initiated the descent and
declared an emergency.
ORGANIZATION AND MANAGEMENT INFORMATION
At the time of the accident, XtraJet employed eight pilots and four dispatchers and
operated two Gulfstream 1159 airplanes and one Learjet 36 airplane. The captain and first officer
were employees of AAN and were not listed on XtraJet’s Part 135 operating certificate.15 The
accident airplane was not listed on XtraJet’s or any other Part 135 certificate. XtraJet
representatives stated that the company had intended to add the captain, first officer, and airplane
to its Part 135 certificate before the accident but had not done so. According to XtraJet’s former
director of operations, the accident airplane had maintenance-related issues that needed to be
resolved before it could be inspected for Part 135 conformity and then added to the certificate.
Xtrajet’s former director of operations believed placement on the company’s certificate would
not have happened until spring 2004.
During initial postaccident interviews, XtraJet personnel told a Safety Board investigator
that the flight was operated as a personal flight to pick up a family member of the companies’
owner. During subsequent interviews, XtraJet’s former director of operations stated that he had
reason to believe that the intended passenger was not a family member but was instead “a loyal
paying customer.”
15 XtraJet listed a JETT employee on its Part 135 certificate as the company’s director of maintenance.
NTSB/AAB-06/04

10
ANALYSIS
About 0913, a Learjet 24B, N600XJ, registered to and operated by Pavair, Inc., departed
controlled flight, entered a near-vertical descent, and crashed into high desert terrain near
Helendale, California. Review of ATC communications and airplane radar data revealed that the
flight crew requested a return to the departure airport about 12 minutes after takeoff as the flight
was climbing through 26,000 feet. The controller asked the pilots if they were declaring an
emergency, and the first officer replied that they were not. During this transmission, the first
officer’s voice sounded similar to the voice he used during his transmissions earlier in the flight,
indicating that he was not under any increased stress at that time. The flight crew was instructed
to descend to and maintain 24,000 feet. As the controller was issuing additional route clearance
information, he asked the flight crew to confirm that the airplane was level at 24,000 feet. At that
time, the radar data showed that the airplane had descended through 23,000 feet. About
15 seconds later, the first officer declared an emergency. The first officer’s voice sounded
agitated and highly distressed during this transmission compared with his earlier transmissions.
Transcripts of recorded air-to-ground communications showed that about 2.5 minutes had
elapsed from the flight crew’s request to return to the departure airport and the declaration of the
emergency.
A review of the radar data showed that the flight had a normal descent rate from 26,000
to 24,000 feet (less than 2,000 fpm [feet per minute]). The descent rate then rapidly increased to
6,500 fpm and then to 10,000 fpm. Integration of the communications times and the radar data
revealed that the first officer’s declaration of an emergency occurred about the time of the
increase in the descent rate to 10,000 fpm. A witness on the ground saw the airplane in level
flight before it pitched nose down slightly, returned to level flight, and then pitched nose down in
a near-vertical descent. He stated that the airplane remained in a nose-down attitude until it
impacted terrain and exploded. The witness added that he did not observe any components
separate from the airplane or any smoke or fire before the airplane impacted terrain.
All airplane system components were destroyed and thus could not be examined. All
primary and secondary flight control surfaces were identified; however, impact damage
precluded any determination of preimpact control system continuity. The horizontal stabilizer
was trimmed for 285 knots calibrated airspeed. No useful remnants remained from the cockpit
instrument panel. No evidence of an in-flight fire was found. Impact damage precluded a
determination of whether the engines were operating at impact. An aircraft performance study
for this accident revealed that the accident airplane did not approach its maximum operating
airspeeds until after the pilots initiated the descent and declared an emergency. No unusual or
hazardous meteorological phenomena were near the airplane at the time of the loss of control.
