National Transportation
Safety Board
PRSRT STD
Washington, D.C. 20594
Postage & Fees Paid
OFFICIAL BUSINESS
Penalty for Private Use, $300
NTSB
Permit No. G-200
Controlled Flight Into Terrain
Beech King Air 200, N501RH
Stuart, Virginia
October 24, 2004
Aircraft Accident Brief
NTSB/AAB-06/01
PB2006-104812
National National
Transportation Transportation
Safety Board Safety Board
Washington, D.C. Washington, D.C.

THE CORRECTION BELOW IS INCLUDED
IN THIS VERSION OF THE PUBLISHED REPORT
AIRCRAFT ACCIDENT BRIEF
NTSB/AAB-06/01 (PB2006-104812)
Controlled Flight Into Terrain
Beech King Air 200, N501RH
Stuart, Virginia
October 24, 2004
• The front cover, title page, abstract, and table of contents were added to this version of the accident brief.
(March 16, 2006)
The pages were originally missing from the brief.

Aircraft Accident Brief
Controlled Flight Into Terrain
Beech King Air 200, N501RH
Stuart, Virginia
October 24, 2004
NTSB/AAB-06/01
PB2006-104812 National Transportation Safety Board
Adopted February 7, 2006 490 L’Enfant Plaza, S.W.
Washington, D.C. 20594

National Transportation Safety Board. 2006. Controlled Flight Into Terrain Beech King Air 200, N501RH
Stuart, Virginia October 24, 2004. Aircraft Accident Brief NTSB/AAB-06/01. Washington, DC.
The National Transportation Safety Board is an independent Federal agency dedicated to promoting aviation, railroad, highway,
marine, pipeline, and hazardous materials safety. Established in 1967, the agency is mandated by Congress through the
Independent Safety Board Act of 1974 to investigate transportation accidents, determine the probable causes of the accidents,
issue safety recommendations, study transportation safety issues, and evaluate the safety effectiveness of government agencies
involved in transportation. The Safety Board makes public its actions and decisions through accident reports, safety studies,
special investigation reports, safety recommendations, and statistical reviews.
Recent publications are available in their entirety on the Web at <http://www.ntsb.gov>. Other information about available
publications also may be obtained from the Web site or by contacting:
National Transportation Safety Board
Records Management Division, CIO-40
490 L’Enfant Plaza, S.W.
Washington, D.C. 20594
(800) 877-6799 or (202) 314-6551
Safety Board publications may be purchased, by individual copy or by subscription, from the National Technical Information
Service. To purchase this publication, order report number PB2006-104812 from:
National Technical Information Service
5285 Port Royal Road
Springfield, Virginia 22161
(800) 553-6847 or (703) 605-6000
The Independent Safety Board Act, as codified at 49 U.S.C. Section 1154(b), precludes the admission into evidence or use of
Board reports related to an incident or accident in a civil action for damages resulting from a matter mentioned in the report.

iii
Contents
History of Flight........................................................................................................1
Pilot Information.......................................................................................................6
The.Captain...........................................................................................................6
The First Officer....................................................................................................6
Airplane Information...............................................................................................7
Meterological Information.......................................................................................7
Aids to Navigation.....................................................................................................8
Airport Information..................................................................................................8
Air Traffic Control................................................................................................8
Flight Recorders........................................................................................................9
Wreckage And Impact Information........................................................................9
Medical And Pathological Information.................................................................10
Tests And Research.................................................................................................11
Propellers............................................................................................................11
Engines................................................................................................................11
Aircraft Performance Study................................................................................11
Demonstration Flight..........................................................................................12
Organizational And Management Information...................................................14
Postaccident Actions...........................................................................................15
Additional Information..........................................................................................15
Analysis....................................................................................................................17
Probable Cause........................................................................................................18



A L
T RAN SPO
R National Transportation Safety Board
N T
O E PLURIBUS UNUM A
I T Washington, D.C. 20594
A T IO
N N
SAFETYBO
AR
D
Aircraft Accident Brief
Accident Number: IAD05MA006
Aircraft and Registration: Beech King Air 200, N501RH
Location: Stuart, Virginia
Date: October 24, 2004
Adopted on: February 7, 2006
HISTORY OF FLIGHT
On October 24, 2004, about 1235 eastern daylight time,1 a Beech King Air 200,
N501RH, operated by Hendrick Motorsports, Inc., crashed into mountainous terrain in
Stuart, Virginia, during a missed approach to Martinsville/Blue Ridge Airport (MTV),
Martinsville, Virginia. The flight was transporting Hendrick Motorsports employees and
others to an automobile race in Martinsville, Virginia. The two flight crewmembers and
eight passengers were killed, and the airplane was destroyed by impact forces and
postcrash fire. The flight was operating under the provisions of 14 Code of Federal
Regulations (CFR) Part 91 on an instrument flight rules (IFR) flight plan. Instrument
meteorological conditions (IMC) prevailed at the time of the accident.
The flight departed from Concord Regional Airport (JQF), Concord, North
Carolina, about 1156. An examination of radar data and voice communications from the
Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) revealed that, during the en route portion of the
flight, a radar target identified as the accident airplane maintained all assigned altitudes
and headings.
As the airplane approached MTV, an air traffic controller advised the flight crew
that the airplane was second in line for the localizer runway 30 approach. The controller
instructed the pilots to hold “as published” on the localizer course at 4,000 feet mean sea
level (msl)2 and to expect a 28-minute delay in the holding pattern. The flight crew
requested 5-mile legs in the holding pattern, and the controller approved 5- or 10-mile
legs at the crew’s discretion.
The localizer runway 30 approach procedure (see figure 1) included an inbound
course with a magnetic heading of 305º. The minimum descent altitude for the
intermediate section of the approach and the holding pattern southeast of the BALES
locator outer marker (LOM) was 2,600 feet. The BALES LOM is located at 6 distance
1 All times in this brief are eastern daylight time based on a 24-hour clock.
2 All altitudes and elevations in this brief are expressed as msl unless otherwise noted.

2
measuring equipment (DME)3 on the approach course. After crossing the BALES LOM
on the inbound course, the minimum descent altitude on the final segment of the
approach, for an airplane equipped with DME, was 1,340 feet. The missed approach point
(MAP) was at 1 DME and near the approach end of the runway. The distance from the
BALES LOM to the MAP was 5 nautical miles (nm). The published missed approach
procedure instructed the pilot to make a “climbing right turn to 2,600 feet and proceed
direct to BALES LOM and hold.”
The accident airplane approached the BALES LOM from the south (see figure 2),
crossed BALES at 4,000 feet, and turned right toward the outbound leg of the holding
pattern. About that time, the flight crewmembers of the airplane that preceded the
accident airplane on the approach announced that that they were canceling their IFR
clearance after breaking out of the clouds during the approach and then proceeded to land
at MTV.
At 1224:19, while the accident airplane was still turning right to the outbound leg
of the holding pattern, the controller asked the flight crew if the airplane was established
in the holding pattern, and the crew confirmed, “we’re established.” At 1224:26, the
controller cleared the airplane for the localizer runway 30 approach and requested that the
flight crew advise him when the airplane was inbound on the approach. The airplane then
completed a continuous right turn toward the inbound course and crossed the BALES
LOM at an altitude of 3,900 feet.
At 1226:53, the flight crew advised the controller that the airplane was
“established inbound” on the approach. At 1227:04, the controller cleared the airplane for
the approach and approved a radio frequency change from the approach control
frequency to the common traffic advisory frequency (CTAF).4 At 4 DME, or 2 nm after
crossing the BALES LOM on the inbound course, the airplane started to descend from
4,000 feet (see figure 3). The airplane leveled off at 2,600 feet as it passed the MAP.
About 1 nm past the MAP and over the runway, the airplane began a descent to 1,400 feet
and continued on an approximate heading of 305º.
The airplane leveled at 1,400 feet, about 4 nm beyond MTV and 5 nm beyond the
MAP. The airplane maintained level flight between 1,400 and 1,500 feet for the next
1 minute 13 seconds. At 1232:13, about 8 nm beyond MTV, the airplane initiated a
straight-ahead climb.
At 1233:08, the flight crew informed the controller, “we’re going missed at this
time.” The controller asked the flight crew to repeat the radio transmission. The flight
crew repeated the information, and the controller acknowledged the radio transmission.
The controller received no further radio transmissions from the flight crew.
3 One DME equals 1 nautical mile.
4 According to FAA Order 7110.65, “Air Traffic Control,” paragraph 5-1-13, after a controller issues a
frequency change to the CTAF, radar services are automatically terminated.
NTSB/AAB-06/01

3
Figure 1. Localizer runway 30 approach.
NTSB/AAB-06/01

4
Figure 2. Accident airplane’s flightpath.
NTSB/AAB-06/01

5
Figure 3. Accident airplane’s altitude profile.
At 1233:21, the controller advised the flight crew to climb and maintain
4,400 feet. At 1233:24, the radar target was lost. The accident occurred on Bull Mountain
in Stuart, Virginia, at an elevation of about 2,400 feet and near the extended centerline of
the runway.
Witnesses at MTV said that they heard the airplane pass overhead but did not see
it because of the cloud cover. They stated that the engine sound was smooth and
continuous with no interruption. One witness said that the engines sounded as though
they were at idle. Two witnesses stated that they heard no increase in engine sound at the
time they perceived the airplane to be at a position that coincided with the MAP.
Two witnesses who were about 3 to 4 miles southeast of Bull Mountain saw an
airplane fly past them at a low altitude. One of the witnesses said that the airplane was
flying “flat and level” about 60 to 70 feet above ground level and was heading northwest.
This witness also stated that, other than flying “very low,” the airplane did not appear to
be in distress, and the landing gear appeared to be up. The witness further stated that the
speed of the airplane “wasn’t extremely fast.” In addition, the witness noted that the fog
level was low but could not tell how much lower the airplane was from the fog.
A trooper with the Virginia State Police stated that, at the time of the accident and
throughout the search and recovery efforts (which spanned throughout the day and
NTSB/AAB-06/01

6
evening), Bull Mountain was completely obscured by clouds and fog. The trooper stated
that the visibility was between 0 and 0.25 mile.
PILOT INFORMATION
The Captain
The captain, age 51, held an airline transport pilot certificate with a rating for
airplane multiengine land and a commercial pilot certificate with a rating for airplane
single-engine land. The captain’s most recent FAA first-class medical certificate was
issued on December 15, 2003, with the limitation that he “must have corrective lenses for
near vision.” The captain was hired by Hendrick Motorsports on March 25, 2001.
A review of company training records revealed that the captain had accumulated
10,733 hours total flying time, including 8,600 hours in the Beech 1900. His total flying
time in the Beech King Air 200 was 210 hours, with 152 hours as pilot-in-command
(PIC). The captain had flown 67 hours in the last 90 days, 18 hours in the last 30 days,
and about 30 minutes (the accident flight) in the last 24 hours.
On May 20, 2001, the captain attended SimuFlite’s King Air 200 and King Air
1900 recurrent differences training, which included ground and flight simulator training.
He received a PIC proficiency check in accordance with 14 CFR 61.56 and an instrument
competency check in accordance with 14 CFR 61.57. On May 16, 2002, the captain
attended SimuFlite’s recurrent ground and flight simulator training for the King Air 300
and 350. He received a PIC proficiency check in accordance with 14 CFR 61.58. On
May 22, 2003, the captain attended FlightSafety’s Beech 1900 recurrent ground and flight
simulator training. He received a PIC proficiency check in accordance with 14 CFR
61.58.
From January 19 to March 2, 2004, the captain attended FlightSafety’s Saab 2000
initial second-in-command (SIC) training, which included ground and flight simulator
training. He completed a SIC proficiency check in accordance with 14 CFR 61.55.
The captain’s most recent flight review was on May 27, 2004. He completed
Beech 1900 recurrent PIC ground and flight simulator training with FlightSafety and a
PIC proficiency check in accordance with 14 CFR 61.58.
The First Officer
The first officer, age 31, held a commercial pilot certificate with ratings for
airplane single-engine land, multiengine land, and instrument airplane. Her most recent
FAA first-class medical certificate was issued on April 1, 2004, with no limitations. She
was hired by Hendrick Motorsports on November 19, 2001.
A review of company training records revealed that the first officer had
accumulated 2,090 hours of total flying time, including 1,200 hours in single-engine
airplanes and 860 hours in multiengine airplanes. Hendrick Motorsports reported that the
NTSB/AAB-06/01

7
first officer had accumulated 640 hours of flying time since her date of hire, 121 hours of
which were in the Beech King Air 200. The first officer had flown 67 hours in the last
90 days, 27 hours in the last 30 days, and about 30 minutes (the accident flight) in the last
24 hours.
On April 8, 2001 (before she was hired by Hendrick Motorsports), the first officer
attended SIMCOM’s initial training for the Beech 200. On May 16, 2002, the first officer
attended SimuFlite’s ground and flight training for the King Air 300 and 350 and received
a SIC proficiency check in accordance with 14 CFR 61.55. On June 26, 2003, the first
officer attended FlightSafety’s Beech 1900 ground and flight recurrent training. She
completed a proficiency check in accordance with 14 CFR 61.55.
The first officer’s most recent flight review was on May 27, 2004. She completed
FlightSafety’s Beech 1900 ground and flight recurrent SIC training, which satisfied the
provisions of 14 CFR 61.55.
AIRPLANE INFORMATION
The accident airplane, a Beech King Air 200, was manufactured in 1981 and had
accumulated 8,140 total flight hours. The airplane was equipped with Pratt & Whitney
Canada turbopropeller engines and Hartzell four-bladed, hydraulically operated,
constant-speed, feathering-type propellers.
The airplane was being maintained in accordance with the manufacturer’s
inspection program. The airplane’s most recent inspection was completed on June 25,
2004, at 8,079 flight hours.
The airplane was equipped with a Bendix/King KLN 90B global positioning
system (GPS) receiver and a Mid-Continent Instruments MD-41 series GPS annunciation
control unit. The GPS database was not current and therefore was not certified for IFR
navigation. The airplane was not equipped with an enhanced ground proximity warning
system (EGPWS).
The airplane had been for sale, so a decision had been made to “park” the
airplane; upgrade another King Air 200, N502RH, with an EGPWS; and certify that
airplane’s GPS for IFR flight. The intended buyer for N501RH preferred N502RH and
was allowed to purchase that airplane instead. As a result, the accident airplane was “put
back out on the line” and was scheduled for a GPS upgrade and an EGPWS installation at
the end of the 2004 racing season.
METEROLOGICAL INFORMATION
A National Transportation Safety Board meteorologist conducted a study of the
weather conditions in southwestern Virginia and northern North Carolina on the day of
the accident. The study depicted a warm front that produced overcast clouds, high relative
humidity, patchy fog, and mist, which resulted in IMC across the region.
NTSB/AAB-06/01

8
About 1140, the weather recorded at MTV included an overcast ceiling at 400 feet
with 1 1/4 miles of visibility5 and wind from 200º at 3 knots. The temperature was 55º
Fahrenheit (F), and the dew point was 55º F. The altimeter setting was 29.99 inches of
mercury (Hg).
About 1200, the weather recorded at MTV included an overcast ceiling at 600 feet
with 5 miles of visibility and wind from 220º at 3 knots. The temperature was 57º F, and
the dew point was 55º F. The altimeter setting was 29.98 inches of Hg.
About 1220, the weather recorded at MTV included an overcast ceiling at 600 feet
with 5 miles of visibility and calm winds. The temperature was 57º F, and the dew point
was 55º F. The altimeter setting was 29.98 inches of Hg.
The captain of the airplane that preceded the accident airplane on the approach
stated that his airplane descended below the cloud layer about 150 feet above the
published minimums. He also stated that the visibility below the clouds was “pretty
clear” with about 2 miles visibility. The captain further stated that he did not recall the
reported weather but did recall that the actual weather fluctuated as the airplane
descended toward MTV and was “a little better” than reported.
AIDS TO NAVIGATION
After the accident, FAA and State of Virginia personnel conducted a ground
inspection of all navigational equipment at MTV. The inspection revealed that the
equipment functioned satisfactorily. Also, the FAA conducted a flight check inspection of
the equipment at MTV, and no problems were noted.
AIRPORT INFORMATION
Air Traffic Control
On October 25, 2004, a Safety Board air traffic control (ATC) specialist requested
voice communication tapes, transcript information, and radar data from the FAA.
Examination of voice communication tapes revealed that the air traffic controller issued
the holding instructions, the approach clearance, and the frequency change in accordance
with FAA Order 7110.65, “Air Traffic Control.” Radar data were derived from the
Greensboro Airport Surveillance Radar-9 radar. Additional radar data were obtained from
the U.S. Air Force 84th Radar Evaluation Squadron and the Roanoke Air Route
Surveillance Radar.
The Safety Board’s ATC specialist conducted a postaccident interview with the
certified professional controller who provided ATC services to the flight crew before the
accident. At the time of the accident, the controller was working the west radar and final
5 In this section, cloud cover is expressed in feet above ground level, and visibility is expressed in
statute miles.
NTSB/AAB-06/01

9
radar positions at the Greensboro/Winston-Salem ATC tower. The controller was
responsible for approach control services for the Greensboro/Winston-Salem airport and
11 satellite airports, including MTV. This area of responsibility extended about 30 nm
north, 25 nm east, and 25 nm west of the Greensboro/Winston-Salem airport from the
ground to 12,000 feet. MTV was located in the northern portion of the controller’s area of
responsibility. The controller stated that the MTV runway was shown on the ATC tower’s
radar display map. He also explained that controllers could select an additional map that
depicted the final approach courses for the satellite airports (including MTV). In addition,
the controller stated that, when an aircraft executed a localizer runway 30 approach to
MTV according to the published descent profile, radar contact would normally be lost
when the aircraft reached 2,000 feet, which occurred about 2 nm before the airport.
The controller stated that he observed the accident airplane’s radar track when the
airplane was about 3 nm southeast of MTV and was descending from 3,600 feet. He
thought that the airplane was high for the approach but could not question the pilots
because they had already been cleared to change to the CTAF and, as a result, the
controller no longer had responsibility for the flight.
At 1230:07, when the airplane was 2.5 nm northwest of the airport and at an
altitude of 1,800 feet, the controller’s computer system generated a minimum safe
altitude warning (MSAW) alert that lasted for 15 seconds. MSAW provides visual and
aural alerts to controllers if a mode C-equipped aircraft is, or is projected to be, below an
appropriate terrain clearance altitude. A review of the radar data indicated that an MSAW
alert had sounded and was visually displayed on the controller’s radar display as a
flashing “LA” (low altitude) in the data block for the accident airplane. The controller
stated that he did not observe or hear the MSAW alert.
At 1230:12, the last radar return from the airplane was received. The MSAW
predicted the projected path of the airplane for another 10 seconds, and the alert ended at
1230:22. The airplane continued to fly beneath radar coverage for about 3 minutes before
the flight crew declared the missed approach on the approach control radio frequency.
FLIGHT RECORDERS
The airplane was not equipped with a cockpit voice recorder (CVR) or flight data
recorder (FDR) and was not required by Federal regulations to be so equipped.
WRECKAGE AND IMPACT INFORMATION
The airplane wreckage was found on October 25, 2004, and all major components
were accounted for at the accident scene. The airplane came to rest on the southeast face
of Bull Mountain at an elevation of about 2,450 feet. The initial impact point was in trees,
and the treetops were cut off at an angle that was parallel to the horizon. The distance
from the first tree strikes to the initial ground scar was about 105 feet. The tree strikes
and the ground scar were both at an elevation of about 2,400 feet. The distance from the
NTSB/AAB-06/01

10
initial ground scar to the main wreckage was about 95 feet. Several pieces of angularly
cut wood were found along the debris path beneath the trees.
The main wreckage was found in an upright position. The cockpit and cabin were
destroyed by impact forces and postcrash fire. The empennage and tail sections were still
attached to the fuselage but were twisted and in an inverted position. The vertical fin and
rudder were damaged by impact forces and postcrash fire. The left horizontal stabilizer
was mostly intact with the elevator attached. The right horizontal stabilizer was damaged
by impact forces, with the inboard section of the elevator still attached and pieces of the
outboard section of the elevator scattered along the wreckage path.
Both wings were still attached to the fuselage at points just outside of the engine
nacelle on each wing. The wings’ outboard sections and their associated parts were
scattered along the wreckage path. The inboard sections were essentially intact but were
damaged by impact forces and postcrash fire. The left and right wing flaps were retracted,
and the left and right main landing gear were retracted and in their respective wheel
wells.
The left engine was in its nacelle and was still attached to the wing by cables and
wires. The engine was damaged by impact forces and postcrash fire. The left propeller
assembly had separated from the engine and was found beneath the fuselage and
entangled with the wreckage. Each blade showed similar twisting and bending, leading
edge gouging, and chordwise scratching. Two blades were bent over almost 180º at
midspan. Another blade was fractured, and the outboard one-third had separated. Another
blade had a blade tip that was wrinkled and torn. The propeller shaft was fractured with
fracture surfaces that were consistent with impact forces and overload.
The right engine had separated from its wing and was found uphill from the main
wreckage. The engine was damaged by impact forces and postcrash fire. The propeller
shaft was fractured and had fracture surfaces that were consistent with impact forces and
overload. The right propeller assembly was located adjacent to the initial impact crater in
an upright position and with all four propeller blades attached. Three of the four blades
displayed similar twisting, bending, leading edge gouging, and chordwise scratching.
Two of these blades had blade tips that were fractured. One blade was bent aft.
Control cable continuity was established from the cockpit to the flight control
surfaces, except for the ailerons. Aileron cable continuity was established from the
cockpit to the point of left and right wing separation outside of the engine nacelles. The
breaks in the aileron cables displayed evidence of overload.
MEDICAL AND PATHOLOGICAL INFORMATION
The Office of the Chief Medical Examiner, Roanoke, Virginia, performed
autopsies on the flight crew and passengers. The Chief Medical Examiner determined that
the cause of death for the airplane occupants was blunt force trauma.
NTSB/AAB-06/01

11
The FAA’s Bioaeronautical Sciences Research Laboratory, Oklahoma City,
Oklahoma, performed toxicological testing on the captain and the first officer. According
to the toxicological testing report for the captain, metoprolol (a prescription blood
pressure medication that is also used to reduce the risk of a heart attack) was detected in
his blood and liver. The captain had indicated his use of ToprolTM (metoprolol) on his
most recent application for an FAA airman medical certificate.
According to the toxicological testing report for the first officer, diphenhydramine
(a sedating, over-the-counter antihistamine that is often known as Benadryl™ and is
typically used for allergy symptoms) was detected in her liver and kidney.
TESTS AND RESEARCH
Propellers
On December 1, 2004, the propellers were examined at an aircraft recovery
facility in Clayton, Delaware. The propellers’ hub and blades were made of aluminum,
and the propellers rotated in a clockwise direction (when viewed from the back). Neither
propeller was feathered, which was consistent with normal operation. All of the damage
(significant twisting, bending, leading edge gouging, and tearing of the blades) was
consistent with impact forces, and no evidence indicated a mechanical anomaly.
Engines
From January 26 to 28, 2005, the engines were examined at the Pratt & Whitney
factory in Montreal, Canada, under the supervision of the Transportation Safety Board of
Canada. No anomalies or mechanical deficiencies were found.
Aircraft Performance Study
An aircraft performance study was conducted by a Safety Board aircraft
performance specialist. The study used data from three separate radar facilities to depict
the flightpath of the accident airplane from the en route phase of flight to the BALES
LOM, throughout the approach, and beyond the airport to the crash site.
The published missed approach procedure called for a climbing right turn at the
MAP, which is over the runway threshold. Radar data indicated that the flight crew
initiated the missed approach 7.5 nm beyond the MAP. The airplane then entered a
straight-ahead climb on the runway heading.
The aircraft performance study also presented the flightpath that the airplane
would have flown if it had entered a climbing right turn at the point where the climb was
initiated. Interpolation of nominal climb rates and a standard turn rate depicted a
flightpath that would have kept the airplane clear of terrain. Figure 4 compares the
airplane’s flightpath (in blue) with the flightpath that would have resulted if the airplane
had entered a standard-rate right turn during the climb (in red).
NTSB/AAB-06/01

12
Figure 4. Depiction of the accident flightpath (blue) and the flightpath incorporating a
climbing right turn (red) along with terrain elevations.
Demonstration Flight
On January 7, 2005, the Operations Group Chairman participated in a
demonstration flight in a Hendrick Motorsports Beech 1900 (N503RH) with two
company pilots aboard. One purpose of the flight was to demonstrate the operation and
functions of the Bendix/King KLN 90B GPS, the Mid-Continent Instruments MD-41
series GPS annunciation control unit, and other associated instrument displays. Another
purpose of the flight was to observe the GPS runway 30 approach and the localizer
runway 30 approach to MTV and other airplane navigation and system features that were
available in the accident airplane.
If the database were current, the GPS unit would display the expiration date. If the
database were expired, the GPS unit would indicate so, and the pilot would have to
acknowledge the database’s expiration. On powerup, the database displayed a date of
September 3, 2003, with the message “non-current database.” The database also
displayed a message indicating that “all data must be confirmed before use,” which was
acknowledged by the pilot.
The pilots stated that they always used the “track up” feature versus the “north
up” feature on the GPS. The track up feature showed the airplane flying to the top of the
GPS screen, which provided better situational awareness than showing the airplane’s
relation to north at the top of the screen.
NTSB/AAB-06/01

13
With the GPS selected on the GPS annunciation control unit, the horizontal
situation indicators (HSI) displayed GPS information, including to/from indications,
course needle steering, and distance to waypoint. However, when a localizer or
instrument landing system frequency was tuned on the No. 1 NAV (navigation) radio,
which is displayed on the captain’s (left) side, the autoselect frequency feature
automatically replaced the GPS information from the captain’s HSI with information
pertaining to the NAV mode. (According to the flight crew, the GPS features functioned
identically in the accident airplane.)
On the demonstration airplane, the GPS was installed in the front instrument
panel. As a result, the flight crew could easily view the GPS screen.6
After the demonstration airplane took off from Henderson Oxford Airport,
Oxford, North Carolina, the pilots selected the Danville very high frequency
omnidirectional range (VOR), BALES LOM, and MTV as waypoints. While the airplane
was approaching the Danville VOR, a flashing waypoint light illuminated on the GPS
annunciation control unit on the front instrument panel. The light flashed for about 1.5
nm until the airplane passed the Danville VOR. The GPS autosequenced to the next
waypoint, which was the BALES LOM, and drew a course line from the Danville VOR
to BALES, which was depicted on the GPS screen. A message light then illuminated on
the annunciation control unit, and the message on the GPS screen instructed the pilot to
set the course deviation indicator (CDI) on the course to the BALES LOM. Once the CDI
was set, the message light extinguished.
The GPS autoscale feature automatically chose the smallest map scale that
displayed the active waypoint and the waypoint after the active waypoint if one existed.
At this point of the flight, the BALES LOM and MTV were depicted on the GPS screen.
When the airplane was about 1.5 nm from the BALES LOM, the flashing
waypoint light illuminated on the GPS annunciator panel, and the waypoint identifier
(BALES) flashed on the GPS screen. When the airplane was over the BALES LOM, the
automatic direction finder (ADF), which was tuned to BALES, indicated a needle swing
on both the captain’s and the first officer’s radio magnetic indicators. The needle swing
confirmed that the airplane was passing directly over the BALES LOM. After the
airplane crossed the BALES LOM, the flashing waypoint light went out. The GPS
autosequenced to the MTV waypoint, and the HSI showed that the distance to the
waypoint was 5.2 nm.
The message light on the annunciation control unit illuminated, and the message
reminded the pilot to set the CDI on a course of 305º (the inbound course for the localizer
runway 30 approach). The pilot set the CDI on a course of 305º.
After the airplane crossed the BALES LOM, the pilot initiated a right turn and
continued that turn to the inbound course. Once the airplane was established on the
6 On the accident airplane, the GPS was installed between the cockpit seats below the level of the seat
cushion. As a result, pilots in both seats were required to turn their heads 90º toward the center of the
airplane and then downward to view the screen.
NTSB/AAB-06/01

14
inbound course, the captain’s HSI showed a 5.1 nm distance readout to the MTV
waypoint, and the first officer’s HSI showed a 5.6 DME distance readout to the
localizer/DME station.
After the airplane had overflown the airport, the distance readouts increased on
the captain’s and the first officer’s HSIs. After the airplane had passed the departure end
of the runway, the distance readouts showed a 0.5 nm difference (which was the same as
the difference shown inbound). On the GPS screen, no course line was depicted beyond
the airport; only the moving airplane symbol was displayed with a line drawn from the
airplane symbol back to the airport. Because no additional waypoints had been entered
into the GPS, no further waypoints were available for autosequencing.
During two approaches, when the airplane had overflown the localizer antenna,
some CDI needle movement occurred to the right and back to center. During all of the
runway overflights, the NAV flags did not appear on the captain’s or the first officer’s
HSIs when the airplane passed over the localizer antenna. The GPS steering on the
captain’s side remained steady at all times.
Interviews with pilots at Hendrick Motorsports, including the pilot of the
company’s identically equipped King Air 200, N502RH, revealed that the Bendix/King
KLN 90B GPS was used for backup only and strictly for position awareness. Further, the
pilots who had flown the accident airplane and N502RH to MTV on the localizer
runway 30 approach had all used the GPS and had set up the BALES LOM and MTV as
waypoints.
The KLN 90B GPS Pilot’s Guide stated the following: “as you become proficient
with using the KLN 90B, don’t be tempted to rely on it as the sole means of navigation. A
good pilot never relies on just one source of navigation for either VFR [visual flight
rules] or IFR flying. Cross check your position using VOR, DME, ADF, or other
navigational devices you may have in the cockpit – including your eyes!”
ORGANIZATIONAL AND MANAGEMENT INFORMATION
Hendrick Motorsports, Inc., has operated under different names as the company
grew and evolved. On February 1, 1980, the company hired its first pilot, who, at the time
of the accident, was still employed by the company as a captain. At the time of the
accident, the company employed 18 pilots (including the accident pilots): 15 were
designated as captains, and 3 were designated as first officers. Over the years, Hendrick
Motorsports bought and sold several airplanes, including the Piper Cheyenne II,
Cessna 340, Challenger, Westwind, Falcon 20, Hawker 800, and Learjet 25 and 55. At the
time of the accident, the company owned two King Air 200s, two Gulfstream IIs, two
Beech 1900s, a Bell 407 helicopter, and three Saab 2000s. These aircraft were based at
JQF.
During a postaccident interview, the captain who was hired as Hendrick
Motorsports’ first pilot stated that, before the accident flight, the company’s flight
department had never experienced any accidents, incidents, or violations. He also stated
NTSB/AAB-06/01

15
that the company never pressured any pilots to fly in bad weather and that the pilots
always made the final decision regarding whether to fly in such conditions. The captain
further stated that the flight department’s maintenance costs were never questioned and
that the department’s budget was not limited because senior company management
“wanted it done right.”
Postaccident Actions
After the accident, Hendrick Motorsports made immediate, short-term, and
long-term changes to the company’s organization, practices, and equipment. Some of
these changes had already been planned or were in progress at the time of the accident
and were further enhanced as a result of the company’s participation in the investigation.
Hendrick Motorsports installed an EGPWS on each aircraft. The EGPWS
provides pilots with a pictorial view of terrain (displayed on the radar screen, the
multifunction display, or the GPS screen) in addition to aural warnings (as provided by
the EGPWS). The company also installed a traffic alert collision avoidance system in
each aircraft. Further, the company installed new Garmin GPS 400 units (with EGPWS)
in Beech 1900 airplanes. In addition, the company moved the terrain depiction on the
Gulfstream II from the global navigation system screen, which is mounted on the center
console, to the radar screen on the front instrument panel, which is directly in the pilot’s
view.
Hendrick Motorsports created three new positions: aviation director, safety
program manager, and full-time dispatcher. (The company previously had a part-time
dispatcher.) The company’s chief pilot was selected as aviation director and was
responsible for the oversight of the entire aviation department. (The most senior company
pilot was then promoted to chief pilot.) The responsibilities of safety program manager
were added to the duties of a newly hired pilot who had a background in safety for a
major airline.
Along with the staffing changes, Hendrick Motorsports established a safety
committee that comprised staff members from the company’s operations, flight, and
maintenance departments and hired an independent safety consulting firm to review the
flight department’s operations. Also, Hendrick Motorsports consolidated the company’s
standard operating procedures for all aircraft in its fleet and issued addendums to the
procedures for each aircraft model. In addition, Hendrick Motorsports revised the
company’s training plan to include two training sessions per year for each pilot. One
session consisted of recurrent training, with 1 week of academic and flight simulator
training. The other session consisted of 1 day of academic training for special
circumstances (for example, cold weather considerations and mountain flying) and 1 day
of emergency procedures training in a flight simulator.
ADDITIONAL INFORMATION
The FAA’s Aeronautical Information Manual (AIM) chapter 5, “Air Traffic
Control Procedures,” section 5, “Pilot/Controller Roles and Responsibilities,”
NTSB/AAB-06/01

16
paragraph 5-5-7, “Safety Alert,” states that pilots should initiate appropriate action if they
receive a safety alert7 from ATC and that they should “be aware that this service is not
always available, and that many factors affect the ability of the controller to be aware of a
situation in which unsafe proximity to terrain, obstructions, or proximity to other aircraft
may be developing.”
AIM chapter 5, section 4, “Arrival Procedures,” paragraph 5-4-20, “Missed
Approach,” states, in part, the following standard guidance for pilots:
a. When a landing cannot be accomplished, advise ATC and, upon
reaching the missed approach point defined on the approach procedure
chart, the pilot must comply with the missed approach instructions for
the procedure being used or with an alternate procedure specified by
ATC.
b. Protected obstacle clearance areas for missed approach are predicated
on the assumption that the missed approach is initiated at…the missed
approach point and not lower than the minimum descent altitude.
f. Pilots must ensure that they have climbed to a safe altitude prior to
proceeding off the published missed approach, especially in non-radar
environments.
7 According to the AIM, controllers are to issue a safety alert if they become aware that an aircraft
under their control is at an altitude that, in their judgment, places the aircraft in unsafe proximity to terrain,
obstructions, or other aircraft.
NTSB/AAB-06/01

17
ANALYSIS
The corporate Beech King Air 200 approached the nontowered destination airport
on an IFR flight plan in IMC. The flight crew was instructed to hold at the BALES LOM
on the localizer course at an altitude of 4,000 feet and was then cleared for the approach
during the initial right turn over the LOM. The airplane continued the turn until it was
established on the localizer course inside the LOM at an altitude of about 3,900 feet. The
airplane would have been expected to initially cross the BALES LOM at 4,000 feet; turn
outbound on an extended leg; then, after being cleared for the approach, turn to the
inbound course with sufficient distance from the BALES LOM to descend to an altitude
of 2,600 feet before crossing the BALES LOM. Once the airplane was established on the
localizer course, ATC issued a radio frequency change to the CTAF, and ATC radar
services were automatically terminated. Two nm after crossing the BALES LOM, the
airplane descended from 4,000 to 2,600 feet near the MAP. During this flight segment,
the airplane would have been expected to descend from 2,600 feet at the BALES LOM to
1,340 feet at the MAP. However, an examination of the radar data showed that the
airplane flew an approach that was displaced by about 5 nm compared with the published
approach.
The published missed approach procedure instructed pilots, at the MAP, to make a
climbing right turn directly to the BALES LOM and hold at 2,600 feet. Radar data
showed that the accident airplane did not make a climbing right turn, as required in the
published missed approach procedure. Instead, after passing the MAP, the airplane
continued to descend from 2,600 feet on a course of 305º and leveled off at 1,400 feet,
which was again consistent with a 5-nm displacement. About 8 nm beyond the airport,
the airplane initiated a straight-ahead climb and climbed about 700 feet over the next
2 nm before the flight crew declared a missed approach on the approach control
frequency. ATC acknowledged the call, and, about 3 seconds later, the airplane’s radar
target was lost near the location of the crash site. The accident occurred in mountainous
terrain at an elevation of about 2,400 feet. Examination of the airplane revealed no
mechanical anomalies. The airplane was not equipped with an EGPWS.
When the airplane was 2.5 nm northwest of the airport and at an altitude of
1,800 feet, the controller’s computer system generated an MSAW alert, which lasted
15 seconds. The controller stated that he did not observe or hear the MSAW alert.
However, the MSAW alert was not a factor in this accident because, at the time of the
alert, radar services had already been terminated, and the airplane was not under the
control of ATC. In addition, the airplane continued to fly for about another 7 miles before
the accident occurred. During this time, no further MSAW alerts were generated because
the airplane was flying beneath radar coverage.
Two distinct differences exist between the published approach procedure and the
manner in which the accident pilots flew the approach. First, once the accident airplane
was established on the inbound course, the descents to 2,600 and 1,400 feet appeared to
be keyed to the MAP or MTV rather than to the BALES LOM. Second, the missed
approach was initiated 7 to 8 nm past the MAP and was not properly executed.
NTSB/AAB-06/01

18
An airplane performance study presented the flightpath that the airplane would
have flown if it had entered a climbing right turn at the point that the straight-ahead climb
was initiated. Interpolation of nominal climb rates and standard turn rates depicted a
flightpath that was clear of terrain.
The airplane was not equipped with a CVR or an FDR, which prevented the
Safety Board from determining the events that occurred in the cockpit during the
approach. However, the accident approach profile is consistent with the pilots using the
GPS data to navigate to the BALES LOM and then failing to notice that the GPS had
autosequenced to MTV after the airplane passed BALES. Once the airplane was inbound,
the pilots might have mistakenly believed that the airplane was showing distance data to
the BALES LOM when, in fact, the airplane was showing distance data to MTV.
The airplane was equipped with an IFR-capable GPS receiver, but the database
was not current, and the GPS was not certified for IFR navigation. GPS course guidance
would be displayed on the pilots’ HSIs unless a localizer frequency was tuned on the
No. 1 NAV radio. Postaccident interviews with company pilots revealed that the GPS was
used for backup navigation and position awareness only. Pilots would typically program
the LOM and the airport as waypoints, and the GPS would autosequence to the airport as
the airplane passed the LOM and provide distance and navigation information to the
airport. For approaches that required crossing the LOM twice, first to define the turn to
the outbound leg and then to define the final approach fix on the inbound leg, the GPS
would autosequence to the airport at the initial LOM crossing.
