L
T RAN SPO National Transportation Safety Board
A R
N T
O E PLURIBUS UNUM A
A
TI T
IO Washington, D.C. 20594
N N
SAFETYBO
AR
D
Aircraft Accident Brief
Accident Number: CHI01MA011
Operator/Flight Number: N/A
Aircraft and Registration: Cessna 335, N8354N
Location: Hillsboro, Missouri
Date: October 16, 2000
SUMMARY
On October 16, 2000, about 1933 central daylight time (CDT),1 a Cessna 335,
N8354N, crashed near Hillsboro, Missouri. The pilot and two passengers were killed, and
the airplane was destroyed. The airplane was being operated under the provisions of
14 Code of Federal Regulations (CFR) Part 91 from the St. Louis Downtown Airport
(CPS), Cahokia, Illinois, to County Memorial Airport (EIW), New Madrid, Missouri.
Instrument meteorological conditions (IMC) prevailed for the flight, which departed CPS
about 1915 on an instrument flight rules (IFR) flight plan.
HISTORY OF FLIGHT
During postaccident interviews, a St. Louis police officer who had provided
security to one of the passengers on the accident airplane2 stated that the pilot and two
passengers arrived at CPS about 1140 on the day of the accident and then spent the day
attending four campaign functions. Later that day, the pilot asked this security officer to
take him back to the airport early so that he could prepare for the flight to EIW. The
security officer stated that the pilot contacted the St. Louis Automated Flight Service
Station (AFSS) to obtain a weather briefing during the drive back to CPS.3 The security
officer also stated that the pilot then contacted the fixed-base operator (FBO) at CPS and
asked to have the airplane’s wing tanks topped off with fuel.
1 Unless otherwise indicated, all times are CDT, based on a 24-hour clock.
2 The passenger was the Governor of Missouri and was running for the U.S. Senate, and the purpose of
the flight was to transport him to and from campaign functions.
3 For more information about the content of this briefing and the weather conditions that existed at and
around the time of the accident, see the section titled, “Meteorological Information.”
NTSB/AAB-02/02

2
The security officer reported that after arriving at CPS about 1835, the pilot went
into the FBO to check the weather on the computer and pay for the fuel. The security
officer stated that when he asked the pilot if they were going to be able to make the flight
to EIW, the pilot indicated that he did not anticipate that the weather would cause any
problems with the flight and stated, “I’ve seen better days, but I’ve seen a lot worse.” The
security officer stated that the two passengers arrived at the airport about 1845 and then
boarded the airplane. He stated that the pilot was seated in the left front seat but that he
could not tell where the two passengers were seated.
According to Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) air traffic control (ATC)
transcripts, at 1902:10, the pilot contacted the East St. Louis Air Traffic Control Tower
(ATCT), Ground Control, and requested an IFR clearance to EIW. At 1902:17, the ground
controller cleared N8354N as filed, instructed the pilot to climb to and maintain 2,100 feet
and to expect 7,000 feet 10 minutes after takeoff, and issued a transponder code4 and
departure frequency. At 1902:43, the ground controller cleared N8354N to taxi to runway
30L.5 At 1915:20, the pilot contacted the East St. Louis ATCT, Local Control, and stated
that he was ready to depart from runway 30L. At 1915:24, the local controller issued
N8354N a heading of 200° and cleared it for takeoff. At 1917:10, the local controller
again instructed the pilot to turn left to a heading of 200° and to contact St. Louis Terminal
Radar Approach (and departure) Control (TRACON). Eight seconds later, the pilot
acknowledged the instruction.
At 1918:19, the pilot contacted St. Louis TRACON. At 1918:48, when the
airplane was at approximately 2,200 feet, the St. Louis TRACON Low West (LW)
controller informed the pilot of N8354N that he had radar contact with the airplane and
instructed the pilot to turn left to a heading of 180° and climb to 2,600 feet. The pilot
acknowledged these instructions. At 1920:00, the controller instructed the pilot to turn left
to a heading of 150° and maintain 2,600feet.6
At 1920:07, the pilot stated, “five four November we’re having some problems uh
with primary attitude indicator we’d like uh little bit…higher climb.”7 The LW controller
responded that he would be able to issue him a higher altitude “in about twomiles.”
At 1920:51, the controller asked the pilot to state the airplane’s altitude. The pilot replied,
“we’re at three thousand six hundred.” The controller responded, “okay the uh assigned
altitude was two thousand six hundred but climb and maintain four thousand.” The pilot
responded, “we got our hands full right now.” At 1921:08, the controller stated, “uh roger
4 The airplane’s transponder transmits aircraft information in response to interrogations by ATC
secondary radar, including the aircraft’s altitude, for processing and display.
5 According to the ATC transcript, the pilot asked the ground controller if he could depart from runway
12R instead of runway 30L. Although the controller responded that he could, she indicated that there would
be a significant delay because of three inbound airplanes. The pilot replied that he would “go ahead and take
three zero left” for takeoff.
6 ATC radar data indicate that at this time, the airplane was flying a course of about 250° at
approximately 3,100feet and climbing.
7 A review of the ATC recording revealed that when the pilot stated, “we’re having some problems uh
with primary attitude indicator,” a great deal of background noise was recorded, which obscured the pilot’s
words.
NTSB/AAB-02/02

3
you in some sort of difficulty.” The pilot responded, “we got a primary attitude indicator
that’s not uh reading properly having to try and fly off of copilot [the right-side attitude
indicator].” At 1921:20, the controller advised the pilot to try and fly the airplane level on
any heading and told him that he would try to get him to as high an altitude as possible.
The pilot responded, “appreciate it.”
At 1921:35, the LW controller told the pilot to fly “straight ahead” and stated that
he would get him to visual flight rules (VFR) conditions. At 1921:52, the controller
instructed the pilot to climb to and maintain 4,000 feet and to “let me know when you get
on top [of the clouds].”8 The pilot acknowledged the instruction. At 1922:00, the
controller asked another pilot, whose airplane was at 5,000 feet, if he was on top of the
clouds, and the pilot responded that he was not.9 At 1922:33, the controller reported to
N8354N, “I don’t have much hope for getting you on top uh people say it’s like about
twelve five [12,500 feet].” At 1922:50, the pilot stated that he wanted to head toward
Jefferson City Memorial Airport (JEF), Jefferson City, Missouri, because he understood
that the weather conditions were better there. The controller then asked the pilot if his
“instrument” was showing a heading of 150°, and the pilot responded “well the compass is
showing due south one eight zero [180°].”10 At 1923:12, the controller instructed the pilot
to turn to a heading of 120°, and the pilot acknowledged the instruction.11
At 1923:39, the LW controller told the pilot to “climb and maintain seven thousand
[feet] at pilot discretion.” The pilot acknowledged the instruction and added “we would
like to go direct to jefferson city if possible.” The controller responded, “say jefferson
city.”12 The pilot responded, “that’s right jefferson city.” At 1923:55, the controller
stated, “in that case turn right heading two seven zero.” The pilot then acknowledged the
turn instruction and confirmed the assigned altitude.13
At 1925:12, the LW controller informed the pilot that “it appears you’re heading
northwest but uh you’re basically in a good direction.” At 1928:36, the LW controller
asked the pilot if he was still having “attitude problems.” The pilot replied, “the attitude
problems are continuing.” ATC radar data indicate that at this time, the airplane’s altitude
had reached 7,400 feet and that the airplane had entered a left turn to the southeast.14 The
8 ATC radar data indicate that when the LW controller issued this instruction, the airplane was at
approximately 3,700 feet.
9 During postaccident interviews, the LW controller stated that he also asked other controllers at
adjacent sectors if they had any reports of cloud tops and that the supervisor came over to his position to help
him get weather reports.
10 ATC radar data show that the airplane had just turned south from a more southeasterly heading.
11 In a written statement to the FAA, the LW controller indicated that he thought the pilot was asking
for assistance in getting to his original destination (EIW) and that this was the reason he issued the
120° heading.
12 During postaccident interviews, the LW controller stated that he was surprised when the pilot stated
that he wanted to go to Jefferson City. He stated that he asked the pilot to confirm his request to go to
Jefferson City because he thought the pilot wanted assistance continuing to EIW.
13 ATC radar data show that after this transmission, the airplane continued to climb and entered a right
turn to the northwest.
14 The Safety Board could not determine why the airplane turned at this point.
NTSB/AAB-02/02

4
data show that the airplane then descended slightly and that its altitude varied between
7,000 and 7,200 feet. At 1929:31, the pilot stated, “we’re gonna need some vectors
somewhere where we can get down [to] VFR [conditions].”15 The LW controller stated
that he would check around for other weather conditions and that, in the meantime, the
pilot should “just go straight ahead…doesn’t make any difference what direction that is
just go straight ahead.” At 1930:17, the controller told the pilot that the weather at
Columbia Regional Airport, Columbia, Missouri, was 7,000 feet overcast with 7miles
visibility and light rain. The controller told the pilot that the further west he went the
better the weather was going to be. He then asked the pilot if he wanted to head west.
At 1930:35, the pilot responded, “that would be great.” This was the pilot’s last
transmission.
At 1930:37, the LW controller told the pilot to “make a slow right turn as much as
you can the standard rate...as much as you can to make this a stabilized affair.”16 ATC
radar data show that after this instruction was issued, the airplane entered a right turn.
ATC radar data further show that at 1931:17, the airplane had descended to approximately
6,500 feet. At 1931:22, the controller told the pilot to stop the turn and to fly straight
ahead.17 At 1932:28, the controller unsuccessfully tried to contact N8354N. At 1932:34,
the controller transmitted, “november three five uh five four november radar contact
lost.”18
The accident occurred at night in dark lighting conditions. The location of the
accident site was 38° 18.653' north latitude, 90° 30.125' west longitude at an elevation of
about 826 feet mean sea level.
PERSONNEL INFORMATION
Pilot
The pilot, age 44, held a commercial pilot certificate with airplane multiengine
land and instrument airplane ratings and a private pilot certificate with airplane
single-engine and multiengine land19 and single-engine sea ratings. The pilot’s most
15 During postaccident interviews, the controller stated that he became concerned when the pilot
requested vectors to VFR conditions and that, in his opinion, this was the first time that the pilot conveyed a
sense of urgency regarding his situation.
16 According to the “Pilot/Controller Glossary,” a standard rate turn is a turn of 3° of heading change
per second.
17 ATC radar show that after this instruction, the airplane climbed for the next several seconds,
reaching its maximum altitude of 7,700 feet, and then descended rapidly.
18 The last radar contact with the airplane was at 1931:57, at which time, the airplane was at an altitude
of 2,700feet.
19 On January 14, 1993, the pilot was denied a private pilot multiengine land rating because he
followed improper single-engine go-around procedures. On January 16, 1993, the pilot passed a subsequent
checkride, and he received a private pilot multiengine land rating.
NTSB/AAB-02/02

5
recent FAA second-class airman medical certificate was issued on January 21, 2000, and
contained the limitation that he wear corrective lenses.
The last entry in the pilot’s logbooks was dated April 27, 2000. Investigators used
the pilot’s logbooks, campaign flight logs, and flight logs from other airplanes the pilot
had flown20 to estimate the pilot’s total flight experience. The pilot’s estimated total flight
time at the time of the accident was about 1,829.7 hours, including about 735 hours of
multiengine flight time, of which 513 hours were in a Cessna 335. The pilot’s estimated
total night flight time was about 460.5 hours, of which 157.4 hours were in a Cessna 335.
The pilot’s estimated total actual instrument flight time was about 87.6hours, of
which 22.4 hours were in a Cessna 335.21 His estimated total simulated instrument flight
time was about 65.2 hours, of which 1hour was in a Cessna 335. Records indicate that the
pilot’s most recent instrument proficiency checkride was on September 21, 1999. Flights
recorded in the pilot’s logbook that contained the remark “partial panel flight” totaled to
about 12.3 hours,22 none of which were in a Cessna 335.
The pilot’s estimated flight time in the 90 days before the accident flight was about
93.6hours, of which 81.3 hours were in a Cessna 335. The pilot’s estimated flight time in
the 30days before the accident flight was about 38 hours, of which 32.4 hours were in a
Cessna 335.
According to the pilot’s personal physician, the pilot was in “excellent health”
during the 12 months before the accident. He reported that the pilot had no acute illnesses;
did not take any medications; and did not use alcohol, tobacco, or caffeine. Family and
friends reported that the pilot exercised on a regular basis, preferring to run or walk in the
mornings. Friends also reported that he would not have flown if he were tired. Further,
they stated that he had been known to cancel trips when the weather conditions were
unfavorable.
Pilot’s Training
A review of training records shows that the pilot received an insurance “checkout”
from a flight instructor in the accident airplane between November 21 and December 6,
1997. The checkout consisted of 15 hours of flight time, during which the pilot was
20 The pilot had been co-owner of a Piper PA-28-181 Archer since February 1, 1989, and had also
flown a Beechcraft B33 Debonair registered to one of the passengers.
21 The last entry in the pilot’s logbook that shows that he flew in IMC was on March 15, 2000, at
which time he logged 1.5hours of instrument flight time. The Safety Board could not determine how much
of the flight time that the pilot had accumulated since his last logbook entry on April 27, 2000, was in IMC
nor could the Board determine if the pilot had met the flight experience required by CFR Section 61.57 to
act as pilot-in-command (PIC) in IMC.
22 Partial panel flight refers to flight training in which it is simulated that some of an airplane’s
instruments (for example, the attitude indicator) have failed by either covering them up or removing power
from them. All of the flight time documented as partial panel flight time by the pilot was simulated during
training flights with an instructor. The Safety Board could not determine how much of each flight’s total
time was devoted to partial panel instruction.
NTSB/AAB-02/02

6
exposed to systems training and IMC, normal, and emergency procedures. The pilot
logged 2.5 hours of this flight time as instrument training and 7.5 hours as night flight
time.
From May 15 through 17, 1998, the pilot attended and completed a Systems and
Operational Procedures Training Seminar held by Twin Cessna Flyer, Defiance, Ohio.
According to the course materials, the course’s primary purpose was to “help the
pilot/owner of twin Cessna aircraft prevent emergencies and accidents through increased
knowledge of aircraft systems and operational procedures.” The course included 3 days of
classroom and lab instruction. The instruction covered the following information:
systems—knowledge, operation, and maintenance; normal and emergency procedures;
decision-making and judgment; and proficiency flying. A portion of the course manual
titled, “Normal and Emergency Operating Procedures,” covered the twin Cessna’s vacuum
system.23 The course manual also contained a Twin Cessna Checklist, which included
performing a vacuum system check as part of the engine start and shutdown procedures.
Further, a copy of the Pilot Operating Handbook Supplement that outlined the engine start
and shutdown procedures, which includes the performance of a vacuum system check,
was distributed to and discussed with the attendees as they were reviewing the vacuum
system.
Pilot’s 72-Hour History
Coworkers, friends, and the pilot’s sister provided information to Safety Board
investigators about the pilot’s activities during the 72 hours before the accident. On
October 13, 2000, the pilot was reported to have arrived at his office in Rolla, Missouri,
sometime between 1430 and 1600 and to have departed about 1800. From about 2000
to 2200, the pilot was reportedly at his home visiting with the caretakers of his farm. The
pilot reportedly drove the caretakers and their family back to their house and arrived back
home between 2230 and 2300.
On October 14th, the pilot was seen at his home between 0930 and 1000, where he
was getting ready for a trip. According to the pilot’s sister, he flew N8354N from Rolla to
Columbia, Missouri, where he attended a football game. According to a campaign
schedule, the pilot was scheduled to depart Columbia at 1405 and arrive in Creve Coeur,
Missouri, at 1450. According to the pilot’s sister, after arriving at Creve Coeur, the pilot
departed for Cuba, Missouri, and then continued on to Rolla.
On October 15th, the pilot attended church in Rolla. About 1208, the pilot sent an
e-mail to a friend stating that he had flown for the campaign almost every day recently,
that he had slept soundly at home the night before, that he was over a cold, that he had run
the day before after not having run in over a week, that he was heading for Kansas City
that afternoon, and that he was returning to Jefferson City that night. The caretaker’s wife
reported that the pilot called her from his office between 1000 and 1300. The pilot’s sister
reported the he departed Rolla about 1400 to pick up their parents in St. Louis to fly them
23 A review of the course manual did not reveal to what extent vacuum pump failures were discussed
during the training.
NTSB/AAB-02/02

7
to Kansas City. According to a campaign schedule, the pilot was scheduled to depart
Creve Coeur at 1445 and arrive in Kansas City at 1615. The pilot was then scheduled to
depart Kansas City at 2045 and arrive in Jefferson City at 2135, where he was expected to
spend the night.
On October 16th, the pilot was scheduled to depart JEF at 1025 and arrive at CPS
at 1110. According to a security officer, the airplane actually arrived at CPS about 1140.
Both the pilot and passengers proceeded to scheduled campaign events. That afternoon
the pilot called his office and stated that he was running behind schedule and that he
would not be in the office that day as he had previously planned. The pilot’s sister
reported that the pilot visited the campaign office in the afternoon where he checked the
weather on a computer before leaving for the next campaign event about 1645.
About 1815, the pilot asked one of the security officers to take him back to the airport
early so that he could prepare for the flight to EIW.
Pilot-rated Passenger
One of the accident airplane’s passengers was a licensed pilot. On August 25,
1997, he obtained a private pilot certificate with an airplane single-engine land rating. On
May 16, 1999, he obtained an instrument airplane rating. He held a third-class medical
certificate with the limitation that he must wear lenses for distant vision and possess
glasses for near vision. He owned and flew a Beechcraft B33 Debonair. Members of the
security detail and other pilots who had traveled previously with this passenger stated that
although he was a licensed pilot, he normally sat in the back of the airplane when there
were other passengers on board or when he needed to prepare for his next campaign event.
Air Traffic Controller
The St. Louis TRACON LW controller, age 54, was hired by the FAA in 1968.
Before being hired by the FAA, he was an air traffic controller in the U.S. Air Force for
3 1/2 years. The controller’s first assignment with the FAA was at the Chicago O’Hare
International Airport (ORD), Chicago, Illinois, ATCT. He worked at the ORD ATCT from
1968 until 1970 or 1971.24 The controller then went to work at the Rockford, Illinois,
ATCT until 1977. He then worked at the ORD TRACON until 1980, at which time, he left
to work at the St. Louis TRACON. The controller held an airline transport pilot certificate
with an airplane multiengine land rating, a commercial glider certificate, and a certified
flight instructor glider certificate. He held type ratings for Falcon-20, -50, and -900 series
airplanes. He reported that his total flight time was approximately 6,800 hours. On the
day of the accident, he was assigned to work from 1550 to 2355; however, he arrived at
the facility about 1520. The controller had been working at the LW position for about
45 minutes before handling the accident airplane.
The controller stated that after starting his shift, during his briefing, he was
informed that level 1 through level 3 weather existed in the area.25 He reported that he
24 The controller could not remember the exact date that he left the ORD ATCT.
NTSB/AAB-02/02

8
selected level 2 and level 3 on his computer display and that it indicated that only level 2
weather existed in the area. The controller reported that air traffic in his area of
responsibility was “typical and routine.”
AIRPLANE INFORMATION
General
The accident airplane, N8354N, a Cessna 335,26 serial number (S/N) 335-0063,
was manufactured by the Cessna Aircraft Company in 1980. Airplane records show that
the pilot’s business (a law firm) purchased the airplane on November 27, 1997. The
airplane had six previous owners. The last entry in the Airframe Maintenance Record
(logbook), dated September 28, 2000, shows that, at that time, the airplane had
2,299.4 total hours of operation.
The accident airplane was equipped with two Continental TSIO-520-EB8 engines
(left engine S/N 271477-R and right engine S/N 271478-R), which the Rebuilt Engine
Logs indicate were zero-time, factory-rebuilt engines that were installed on the airplane on
August 27, 1997. The last entry in the Rebuilt Engine Logs, also dated September 28,
2000, shows that, at that time, the left engine had operated about 489.7 hours and the right
engine had operated about 475.5 hours since remanufacture. The accident airplane was
equipped with a 400B Nav-o-matic Autopilot system. Maintenance records show that a
WX-11 Stormscope system was installed in the airplane on December 31, 1991, and that
on November 19, 1998, it was repaired and reinstalled.
According to airplane maintenance records, the last transponder, altimeter, static
system check was performed on May 22, 2000, and the last annual inspection was
accomplished on August 21, 2000, at a total airframe time of 2,257hours.
Assuming that about 30 pounds of baggage were on board27 and that the airplane’s
main fuel tanks were full, the airplane did not exceed its operational weight and balance
limitations.
25 Level 1 weather conditions include very light precipitation measuring between about 0.01 and
0.04 inch per hour with a reflectivity of between 15 and 29 decibels. Level 2 weather conditions include
light to moderate precipitation measuring between about 0.09 and .21 inch per hour with a reflectivity of
between 30 and 39 decibels. Level 3 weather conditions include strong precipitation measuring about
.48 inch per hour with a reflectivity of between 40 and 44 decibels. Reflectivity is the measure of the
efficiency of a target in intercepting and returning radio energy.
26 The Cessna 335 is a twin-engine, low-wing airplane with retractable landing gear.
27 Witnesses on the ground indicated that the passengers were carrying what appeared to be brief
cases. On the basis of this information and the fact that the passengers were not expected to spend the night
in New Madrid and, therefore, would not have needed overnight luggage, the Safety Board estimated that
the amount of baggage on board the airplane was about 30 pounds.
NTSB/AAB-02/02

9
Cessna 335 Vacuum System
According to the Cessna 335 Maintenance Manual, the Cessna 335 vacuum system
consists of a dry vacuum pump28 on each engine, two pressure relief valves, a manifold air
filter,29 vacuum-operated instruments, and necessary plumbing. The pump outlets
(pressure sides) are routed to deicing equipment and primarily exhausted into the engine
nacelle. Vacuum lines are routed from the vacuum pumps through the nacelles to the
relief valves mounted in each wing root area. From the relief valves, additional vacuum
lines are routed through the inboard portion of the wing then through the cabin to the
vacuum manifold (located on the left side of the forward cabin bulkhead), which has
check valves to prevent reverse flow in the event that either vacuum pump fails.
Hoses are routed from the vacuum manifold to the vacuum system instruments,
which include a heading indicator, an attitude indicator, and a vacuum gage for the
standard installation. The heading indicator is an air-driven, gyro-controlled directional
indicator designed to provide stable heading references. The attitude indicator has a
fixed-airplane silhouette and a pitch-and-roll display that moves behind the airplane.30
The movement of the display is guided by the attitude of the actual airplane in relation to a
single air-driven gyroscope. The vacuum gage indicates the amount of vacuum in the
system and the operational status of each pump and has red indicator buttons that will
extend in the event of a pump failure.
The Cessna 335 Pilot’s Information Manual states the following about the vacuum
system:
Each vacuum pump pulls a vacuum on the common manifold; exhausting
the air overboard. The maximum amount of vacuum pulled on the manifold
by each vacuum pump is controlled to a preset level by each pressure relief
valve. Should either of the pumps fail, a check valve is provided in each
end of the manifold to isolate the inoperative vacuum pump from the
system…The vacuum pressure being applied to the gyros is constantly
presented on the suction gage. This gage also provides failure indicators for
the left and right vacuum pumps. These indicators are small red buttons
located in the lower portion of the suction gage which are spring-loaded to
the extended (failed) position. When normal vacuum is applied in the
manifold, the failure buttons are pulled flush with the gage face. Should
insufficient vacuum occur on either side, the respective red button will
extend. No corrective action is required by the pilot, as the system will
automatically isolate the failed vacuum source, allowing normal operation
on the remaining operative vacuum pump.
28 The dry vacuum pumps, which require no lubrication, are located on the aft left accessory mount
pad on each engine. For a diagram of a Cessna 335 vacuum pump, see the section titled, “Component
Examination.”
29 The manifold air filter is mounted behind the cockpit instrument panel.
30 For a photograph of an exemplar attitude indicator and its components, see the section titled,
“Component Examination.”
NTSB/AAB-02/02

10
According to Cessna delivery documents, the airplane was manufactured and
delivered to the first owner with complete left-side flight instrumentation.31 The
vacuum-driven instruments installed on the left side of the instrument panel consisted of a
horizontal situation indicator that incorporated a heading indicator (S/N W7153B) and an
attitude indicator (S/N A4118K). The pitot-static instruments installed on the left side of
the instrument panel included an encoding altimeter, an airspeed indicator, and a vertical
speed indicator. The only electrically driven navigation instrument on the left panel was
the turn and bank indicator.
Cessna’s delivery documents show that the only flight instrument installed on the
right side of the instrument panel at the time of manufacture was a pitot-static altimeter.
Before the pilot’s business purchased the airplane, a second attitude indicator and its
respective vacuum system plumbing and fittings were installed on the right side of the
instrument panel.32
Accident Airplane Maintenance History
Sigma-Tek records show that the attitude indicator/flight director33 installed in the
airplane at the time of the accident was an overhauled unit that it had shipped to the most
recent previous owner in 1996.34 According to airplane maintenance records, in
December 1999, this instrument was removed to clean the pitch slip rings and was then
reinstalled in the airplane.
According to airplane maintenance records, the factory-new vacuum pumps were
installed on the left and right engines on March 28 and April 10, 1997, respectively.35
According to an airframe and powerplants mechanic who worked on the airplane, the pilot
contacted him on September 25, 2000, and stated that he thought his left engine vacuum
pump had failed. The mechanic stated that he discussed the issue with the pilot and
requested that he bring the airplane in for repairs. The mechanic stated that the pilot
brought the airplane in on September 27th and that on September 28th, he removed and
31 According to 14 CFR Section 91.205, the following instruments are required to be installed on an
airplane for instrument flight: an airspeed indicator; an altimeter; a magnetic direction indicator (compass); a
gyroscopic rate of turn indicator; a slip-skid indicator; a clock that displays hours, minutes, and seconds; an
attitude indicator; and a heading indicator.
32 A review of maintenance records and work orders did not reveal when the right-side attitude
indicator was installed; however, the mechanic who performed the prebuy inspection of the airplane for the
pilot’s business reported that it was already installed when the business purchased the airplane. During
postaccident interviews, the most recent previous owner of N8354N stated that he only remembered having
flight instruments on the left side of the instrument panel. However, according to the manufacturer of the
instrument, Sigma-Tek, the S/N on the right-side attitude indicator matched the S/N of an attitude indicator
that it had shipped to this owner in 1996.
33 Airplane maintenance records indicate that in 1985, the left-side attitude indicator was replaced with
an attitude indicator/flight director manufactured by Sigma-Tek.
34 A fragment of an instrument case recovered from the accident site had a Sigma-Tek sticker dated
April 10, 1996, marking it as an exchange part.
35 Maintenance records also indicate that the vacuum relief valve filter elements were replaced in
October 1999.
NTSB/AAB-02/02

11
replaced the left engine vacuum pump.36 The mechanic reported that he performed a
postmaintenance operational check on both vacuum pumps and that the pumps operated
normally.
The mechanic also reported that on September 29, 2000, he removed the right side
attitude indicator for overhaul37 and installed a placard on the instrument panel that stated,
“CO-PILOTS HORIZON GYRO REMOVED FOR O/H 9/29/00.” The mechanic stated
that the pilot had called him on October 9th or 10th to check on the status of the right-side
attitude indicator (referred to here as the “co-pilot’s horizon gyro”). According to the
mechanic, during this conversation, the pilot told him that since the removal of the part,
the vacuum gage had been reading lower than “what he was accustomed to seeing.” The
mechanic stated that he explained to the pilot that “the removed instrument is a restriction
on the vacuum system and since it had been removed, that was the most likely reason for
the lower reading.”
The mechanic stated that he reinstalled the right-side attitude indicator on
October 11th and checked its and the vacuum system’s operation. He reported that he was
satisfied with the operation of both and that he removed the placard for the attitude
indicator. The mechanic reported that he informed the pilot of the work that had been
done and told him to monitor the vacuum gage reading on his next flight to see if the lower
than usual reading he had reported earlier had been corrected by reinstalling the
overhauled attitude indicator. The mechanic stated that the pilot did not inform him if the
lower than usual vacuum gage reading had been corrected by the reinstallation of the
overhauled attitude indicator.
The mechanic also reported that on September 29, 2000, he removed the electric
pitch trim servo for overhaul and installed a placard on the instrument panel that stated,
“PITCH TRIM SERVO REMOVED FOR O/H 9/29/00.” The mechanic reported that the
pilot questioned whether or not he could use the autopilot with the servo removed. The
mechanic stated that to answer the pilot he called an autopilot repair station and was
informed that “the system could be used but it would put more load on the pitch servo
itself.”38 The mechanic reported that on October 11th, he reinstalled the electric pitch trim
servo and determined that it was still inoperative. He reported that he contacted the
overhaul facility and was instructed to return the unit for further repairs. The mechanic
reported that he again installed a placard on the instrument panel stating, “PITCH TRIM
SERVO REMOVED FOR REPAIR 10/11/00.”
36 The manifold air filter was recovered in the wreckage. The recovered air filter had an ink-stamped
manufacturing date of May 2000, and “9/29/00” was hand-written on the cover, which indicates the date that
it was installed on the airplane.
37 The right-side attitude indicator was shipped to Mid-Continent Instrument Company for overhaul.
A Work Order and Inspection Sheet for the attitude indicator noted, “Filter contaminated Rotor Noisy. All
bearings sluggish. Threads on vacuum fitting crossfeed causing vac[uum] port to get chewed up.”
38 With the electric pitch trim motor removed, elevator pressure could be applied by the electrically
driven autopilot pitch servo if the autopilot were engaged and the pilot was not continuously retrimming the
airplane manually.
NTSB/AAB-02/02

12
Cessna Service Bulletins
Service Bulletin MEB99-19
On October 4, 1999, the Cessna Aircraft Company issued Service Bulletin (SB)
MEB99-19 to do the following:
Add vacuum system check procedures for the Pilots Operating Handbook,
Owners Manual and Aircraft Flight Manual. These procedures are being
added to the existing Engine Start and Shutdown procedures to detect for a
possible defective vacuum system check valve or failed vacuum pump
prior to flight. Non-compliance with this Service Bulletin may allow a
defective vacuum system check valve or failed vacuum pump to go
unnoticed which could result in a pilot using instruments for flight that are
not providing proper information due to a malfunctioning and/or failed
vacuum system.…the revisions shall be reviewed and incorporated as soon
as possible, but no later than the next 100 hours of operation or 4 months,
whichever occurs first.
In part, SB MEB99-19 describes the engine start and shutdown procedures as
follows:
STARTING ENGINES
AFTER FIRST ENGINE IS STARTED:
With throttles set at 1000 RPM or higher:
1. Suction Gage – CHECK (reading in green arc)
2. Check that the red vacuum failure button in the suction gage for
that engine is flush with the gage face, prior to starting the opposite
engine.
a. If failure button remains extended (not flush with gage face), a
vacuum source failure has occurred.
b. If both failure buttons are flush with face of gage, a vacuum
system check valve is defective.
AFTER SECOND ENGINE IS STARTED:
With throttles set at 1000 RPM or higher:
1. Suction Gage – CHECK (reading in green arc)
2. Check that the red vacuum failure button in the suction gage
for the engine is flush with the gage face.
a. If failure button remains extended (not flush with gage face), a
vacuum source failure has occurred.
NTSB/AAB-02/02

13
SHUTDOWN
ENGINES:
1. Shut down engine that was started first.
a. The red vacuum failure button for that engine in the suction gage
should extend.
b. If the failure button for the shutdown engine remains flush with
the face of the gage, a vacuum system check valve is defective.
2. With throttle set at 1000 RPM or lower on the running engine,
check that the red vacuum failure button in the suction gage for that
engine is flush with the gage face.
a. If the red vacuum failure button for the running engine extended
when the first engine was shutdown, a vacuum system check
valve and/or pump is defective.
Cessna Aircraft Company records indicate that SB MEB99-19 was mailed to the
registered owner of N8354N on October 4, 1999. During postaccident interviews, pilots
who had flown with the accident pilot reported that he used these procedures routinely. A
portion of the procedures outlined in the SB was found in the wreckage.
Service Bulletin MEB00-5
On October 2, 2000, the Cessna Aircraft Company issued SB MEB00-5 to do the
following:
Provide inspection and replacement intervals for the vacuum system
manifold check valve. Non-compliance with this Service Bulletin may
allow a defective vacuum manifold check valve to go unnoticed which
could result in: a pilot using instruments for flight that are not providing
proper information, and/or a de-ice system not properly inflating the boots
due to a malfunctioning and/or failed manifold check valve….shall be
accomplished within the next 100 hours of operation or 12 months,
whichever occurs first. Refer to Airborne Product Reference Memo No. 39
(or latest revision) for possible subsequent inspections and valve
replacement intervals.
Airborne Product Reference Memo No. 39 applied to N8354N because it had a
1H5 Series vacuum check valve manifold installed in it. The memo states the following:
The…components supplied by Airborne for use in aircraft pneumatic
systems are manufactured with elastomeric components that deteriorate
with age. As these components age, it is increasingly important to
periodically assure their proper operation, thus avoiding unscheduled
system problems and aircraft downtime...It is recommended that beginning
five years from date of manufacture, the serviceability of these components
NTSB/AAB-02/02

14
be verified every twelve months in accordance with the procedure provided
on the applicable Airborne Technical Service Instruction. It is further
recommended that these pneumatic system check valve manifolds and
check valves be replaced ten years from date of manufacture...The 1H5
series check valve manifold provides a means of coupling dual vacuum
sources. More importantly, the 1H5 check manifold provides a means of
isolating these dual vacuum sources in the event that one of the sources is
not in operation….The ‘flapper-type’ check valves are spring loaded in the
closed position. As airflow is pulled through the manifold, the check valves
open allowing airflow through the instruments. If airflow through a check
valve is stopped (i.e., vacuum source taken out of operation), the check
valve will close in order to allow the pneumatic system to properly
function utilizing the lone operating vacuum source.
Cessna Aircraft Company records indicate that SB MEB00-5 was mailed to the
registered owner of N8354N on October 2, 2000. It is unknown if the pilot/owner of
N8354N received this SB. The mechanics that routinely performed maintenance on
N8354N stated that they did not have any discussions with the pilot regarding
SB MEB00-5.
METEOROLOGICAL INFORMATION
About 1602 on the day of the accident, the pilot contacted the St. Louis AFSS for a
weather briefing. According to a recording of the conversation, the pilot requested the
weather for the first leg of the planned flight (from CPS to EIW) with a scheduled
departure time of 1730 and a planned cruising altitude of between 5,000 and 9,000 feet.
He also requested weather for the second leg of the proposed flight (from EIW to JEF)
with a scheduled departure time of 2030. The briefer indicated that there was a
low-pressure system and a stationary front over southern Missouri. The briefer also
indicated that there was an extensive area of IFR conditions north of the front, that an
AIRMET (airmen’s meteorological information)39 was current for the area, and that a
large band of rain showers extended over the area. The briefing included the current
conditions for airports along the route of flight, the forecast for southern Missouri, winds
aloft data, and available pilot reports. The briefer reported that the cloud tops were
expected to be at approximately 25,000 feet. After receiving this information, the pilot
stated that he would call back for an update and to file his flight plans.
About 1811, the pilot contacted the St. Louis AFSS for an updated weather
briefing and to file his IFR flight plans. The pilot told the briefer that the first leg of the
flight would take 1hour and that there were 4.5 hours of fuel and three people on board.
The briefer informed the pilot that the current weather conditions at CPS were wind 010°
at 9 knots; visibility 2 miles with rain and mist; broken cloud ceiling at 600 and 1,000 feet,
39 AIRMET Zulu update 3 was issued at 1431 and was valid until 2100 on the day of the accident. The
AIRMET called for moderate rime to mixed icing in clouds and in precipitation between 12,000 and
22,000 feet. This AIRMET covered portions of Illinois, Indiana, Missouri, and Kentucky.
NTSB/AAB-02/02

15
2,500 feet overcast; temperature 15° Celsius (C); and dew point 14° C. The briefer
reported that an area of low pressure was moving into New Madrid along with a stationary
front. The briefer further reported that there was a chance of moderate rime or mixed
icing above 12,500 feet and that there were several thunderstorms along and around the
pilot’s intended route of flight. The briefer then informed the pilot that the St. Louis winds
aloft for 3,000 feet were 050° at 10 knots and that the winds at 6,000 feet were light and
variable. The briefer informed the pilot that near New Madrid, the winds aloft were light
and variable at 3,000 feet and 200° at 12 knots for 6,000 feet.
The briefer asked the pilot if he wanted to file an altitude for the flight plan, and
the pilot responded, “7,000 feet.” The pilot then changed his previous estimated departure
time from 1830 to 1845 and stated that he wanted to fly directly to EIW. The pilot then
filed a flight plan for the flight from EIW to JEF. The briefer then informed the pilot that
he would be flying too low for ice but that it was “naturally gonna be a little bumpy in that
semi cumulus type form stuff ah so ah you know maybe bases and tops if you happen to
find em.” The weather briefing ended about 1827.
A National Weather Service National Center for Environmental Prediction
regional surface analysis chart showed that the main weather features at the surface within
the hour of the accident included a low-pressure system over southern Missouri, a cold
front to the southwest of the low-pressure system, a stationary front to the east of the
low-pressure system, and a trough40 of low pressure to the south of the low pressure
system, extending southward into Arkansas. A second weather system, identified as a
trough of low pressure, was approaching the area to the northwest. A high-pressure
system was identified over Wisconsin, with a ridge of high-pressure extending over Iowa,
northern Missouri, and eastern Kansas.
The CPS (located 28 miles northeast of the accident site) special surface weather
observation for 1920 was as follows:
wind from 020 degrees at 12 knots gusting to 16 knots, visibility 2 miles in
light rain and mist, ceiling broken at 600 feet, broken at 1,200 feet, and
overcast at 3,200 feet, temperature 15 degrees C (59 degrees [Fahrenheit]
F), dew point 14 degrees C (57 degrees F), altimeter 30.06 inches
[mercury] Hg. Remarks; automated observation, precipitation since 1853
was reported at 0.04 of an inch.
The CPS special surface weather observation for 1953 was as follows:
wind from 030 degrees at 11 knots, visibility 2 1/2 miles in moderate rain
and mist, ceiling broken at 800 feet, overcast at 1,200 feet, temperature
15degrees C (59 degrees F), dew point 14 degrees C (57 degrees F),
altimeter 30.06 inches Hg. Remarks; automated observation…precipitation
since 1853 was reported at 0.14 of an inch.
40 In meteorology, a trough is an elongated region of relatively low atmospheric pressure, often
associated with a front.
NTSB/AAB-02/02

16
The Spirit of St. Louis Airport (SUS), Chesterfield, Missouri (located 23 miles
north-northwest of the accident site), special surface weather observation for 1854 was as
follows:
wind from 030 degrees at 7 knots, tower visibility 3/4 mile in moderate rain
and mist, ceiling broken at 800 feet, temperature 15 degrees C (59degrees
F), dew point 14 degrees C (57 degrees F), altimeter 30.05inches Hg.
Remarks; automated observation, surface visibility 3 miles, ceiling 50 feet
variable to 1,300 feet…precipitation since last hour 0.08inches, 6-hour
precipitation 0.79 of an inch.
The SUS special surface weather observation for 1946 was as follows:
wind from 040 degrees at 11 knots, tower visibility 2 mile in light rain and
mist, ceiling broken at 800 feet, overcast at 1,400 feet, temperature and
dew point 14 degrees C (57 degrees F), altimeter 30.05 inches Hg.
Remarks; automated observation, surface visibility 5 miles, ceiling
600 feet variable to 1,100 feet, precipitation since last hourly observation
0.08inches.
Weather stations surrounding the destination airport (EIW) and the airport to
which the pilot asked to be diverted (JEF) were reporting visual meteorological conditions
around the time of the accident.
The closest upper air data site was in Springfield, Missouri, located 136 miles
southwest of the accident site. The sounding41 from this site indicated a low-level
inversion about 3,500 feet to 5,000 feet, which was saturated up to 8,700 feet with drier air
above. The sounding showed a northeast wind flow of 10 to 30 knots from the surface to
below the inversion, with winds backing to the north and northwest above the inversion at
speeds of 20 to 25 knots. The sounding indicated that the freezing level was 12,654 feet.
WRECKAGE AND IMPACT INFORMATION
The accident site was located in a heavily wooded area near Hillsboro, Missouri.
The initial terrain impact occurred along the slope of a heavily wooded hillside. The
impact resulted in a crater that measured approximately 10feet long by 5 feet wide and
was approximately 4 feet deep at the center.
Sixteen trees were struck, including a stand of trees that were completely severed
along the airplane’s path. The remaining trunk of each severed tree was splintered toward
the southwest, about 240°. Several trees were contacted before the airplane severed the
stand of trees, and the first identifiable tree strike occurred about 144 feet east-northeast of
41 A sounding is a plot of the vertical profile of temperature and dew point (and often winds) above a
fixed location. Soundings are used extensively in severe weather forecasting to determine weather
instability, locate temperature inversions, measure the strength of the cap, and obtain convective
temperatures.
NTSB/AAB-02/02

17
the impact crater. The distance from the first tree strike to the stand of trees was about
64 feet, and the distance from the stand of trees to the impact crater was about 80 feet.
The distance between the impact crater and the furthest piece of wreckage was about 900
feet. An aerial search of the accident site did not reveal any aircraft parts in the area of the
flightpath leading to the initial tree impact or in the area beyond the furthest piece of
recovered wreckage.
The wing tips, nose, tail, and some or all of the flight control surfaces were found
at the wreckage site. The first piece of fuselage wreckage (nose gear door) was located
near the first trees in the stand of trees. Pieces of the right wing tip fuel tank were located
120 feet east-northeast of the impact crater in the area of the initial tree strike; pieces of
the left wing tip fuel tank were located 45 feet southwest of (past) the impact crater.
Portions of the right wing structure were located in line with the flightpath, slightly to the
right of the impact crater. Most of the left wing structure was found further southwest of
the crater than the right wing structure. A large portion of the left engine was located
approximately 300 feet southwest of the impact crater, and it was suspended in a tree
about 60 feet from the ground. The right engine crankshaft was located approximately
900 feet southwest of the crater, in the area that marked the southwestern boundary of the
debris field.
The wreckage field was divided into 30 zones of various sizes, depending on the
aircraft wreckage density. The wreckage was surveyed, documented, and then moved to
the Missouri National Guard Armory in Festus, Missouri, for further examination.
Approximately 70 to 80percent of the airplane was recovered. With the exception of the
horizontal stabilizers and the aft upper fuselage skin, the airframe structure separated into
small (between 6 inches by 6 inches and 12 inches by 12 inches) and medium (between
12 inches by 12 inches and 24 inches by 24 inches) size pieces of debris.
A laser-based measuring device was used to document the accident site. Data
from the laser survey were used to create a three-dimensional model of the airplane’s
flightpath through the trees. The model and the inspection of the accident site revealed that
the airplane was in a 16° to 18° right-wing-down attitude during its entry into the trees.
(See figure 1.)
No evidence of an in-flight fire or in-flight structural failure was noted. All of the
examined fracture surfaces exhibited evidence of overload failure.
NTSB/AAB-02/02

18
---111222oooPPPIIITTTCCCHHH (((LLLeeefffttt pppaaattthhh))) ---222333oooPPPIIITTTCCCHHH (((LLLeeefffttt pppaaattthhh)))
---222999oooPPPIIITTTCCCHHH (((RRRiiiggghhhttt pppaaattthhh)))
---222111ooo
---333555ooo SSSTTTAAANNNDDD 111888oooRRRTTT...
---222555oooPPPIIITTTCCCHHH (((RRRiiiggghhhttt pppaaattthhh))) OOOFFF RRROOOLLLLLL
TTTRRREEEEEESSS 111666oooRRRTTT... TTTRRREEEEEE
RRROOOLLLLLL ###111
111666oooRRRTTT...
RRROOOLLLLLL
666444 FFFEEEEEETTT
NNNOOOSSSEEE GGGEEEAAARRR DDDOOOOOORRR WWWIIINNNGGG
&&& PPPLLLEEEXXXIIIGGGLLLAAASSSSSS DDDEEEBBBRRRIIISSS DDDEEEBBBRRRIIISSS
DDDIIIRRREEECCCTTTIIIOOONNN OOOFFF TTTRRRAAAVVVEEELLL
Figure 1. Diagram showing the side-view of the broken tree tops, construction lines that
connect the trees along the direction of travel, and attitude lines with respect to a
horizontal plane. Each vertical line represents the base and top of a remaining tree.
MEDICAL AND PATHOLOGICAL INFORMATION
Because of the condition of the pilot’s remains, no autopsy was performed.
Toxicological samples (muscle tissue) from the pilot were sent to the FAA’s Toxicology
and Accident Research Laboratory, Oklahoma City, Oklahoma, for examination. The
pilot’s toxicological results were negative for alcohol and drugs.
SURVIVAL ASPECTS
The accident was not survivable.
Emergency Response
A person who lives near the accident site reported the accident to the Jefferson
County 911 Dispatch shortly after it occurred.42 Members of the Goldman Fire District,
the Jefferson County Sheriff’s Department, and the Missouri State Highway Patrol
responded to the site of the accident. After which time, a search of the local area was
NTSB/AAB-02/02

19
initiated. Because of the condition of the wreckage, the poor weather conditions, the rough
terrain, and dark lighting, emergency response efforts were suspended until the next
morning.
TESTS AND RESEARCH
Vacuum System and Cockpit Instrument Component
Examination
Components and pieces of wreckage identified as being part of the accident
airplane’s vacuum system and cockpit instrumentation were inspected at the Safety
Board’s Materials Laboratory in Washington,DC.
Vacuum Gage System Failure Indicator Buttons
Both the left and right vacuum gage system failure indicator buttons (a red plastic
spherical cap inside a 1.25-inch-long brass tube) were located. The indicator buttons did
not have any markings to indicate with which vacuum pump they were associated. The tip
of the end of the red cap on one of the indicators was slightly recessed (.029 inch) from the
end of the brass tube, and this position is at almost the fully retracted position. The
midportion of the brass tube was slightly flattened, and one side of the tube was bent over
the end of the cap. The red cap of the second indicator tube was protruding 0.082 inch
beyond the edge of the brass, which is in the midportion of its full extension range. The
central portion of the second indicator tube and cap was flattened at almost the same
position as the first tube.
Vacuum Check Valve Manifold
Three pieces of the vacuum check valve manifold were found. Two of the pieces
were the end caps of the manifold, both of which had B-nuts attached to them. One of the
B-nuts was found with a flattened aluminum tube attached. The third piece was the center
portion of the manifold. The portion of the data plate that remained on the center section
contained no useful markings. Both end caps are normally attached to the center section
with rivets; pieces of the rivets were found in the end caps. The internal “flapper-type”
check valves and springs were not located.
Left Engine Vacuum Pump
Three pieces of the left engine vacuum pump were found: the mounting
flange/pump base, which remained attached to the engine accessory case; the pump
housing; and the pump housing back flange. (See figure 2 for a diagram of a Cessna 335
vacuum pump.) Fragments of rotor pieces, between 1 and 2 inches long, were recovered.
42 Jefferson County 911 Dispatch received several calls after the accident from people in the area who
reported hearing the airplane and/or seeing a fire.
NTSB/AAB-02/02

NTSB/AAB-02/02
20
Figure 2. Diagram of a Cessna 335 vacuum pump.

21
The pieces contained short scratches and gouges in the direction of rotor rotation and other
scuff marks and scratches in random directions.
No intact rotor vanes were recovered.
The pump mounting was removed from a fragment of the engine case. The drive
shaft end coupling did not rotate when light manual force was applied. After it was
disassembled, it was determined that the coupling did not rotate because of a fractured
braze43 joint between the shaft assembly and the shaft disc. Examination of the braze joint
revealed no evidence of rotational scoring. The drive shaft/coupling assembly was further
disassembled. The drive coupling, flex coupling (shear coupling), and driven coupling
were intact. Four of the six pin shaft drive pins were bent toward one side (not in the
direction of rotation) at varying angles. The pump housing was slightly flattened, and no
internal rotational score marks were visible around the circumference. The base of the
pump housing contained three marks, which encompassed one half of the circumference.
All three marks showed metal dislocation toward the same side of the housing. Once the
coupling was removed, the carbon bearing under the base of the pump was found broken
on the same side. The outside of the pump housing contained numerous impact marks.
Wood and dirt were found embedded within the cooling fins.
Right Engine Vacuum Pump
The right engine vacuum pump was found in two main pieces: the mounting flange
and the pump. The drive coupling was found loose from the other components, and two of
its pins were missing. The flex coupling (shear coupling) was not recovered. The driven
coupling remained attached to the pump assembly and was found intact with pieces of
wood embedded between the coupling driven end and the mounting flange. The pump
was opened and an even distribution of wear was noted. The interior surface of the drive
cap showed no evidence of complete circumferential or lateral marks. Short scratches and
gouges were found in the direction of rotation. The rotor was found broken into five major
pieces with smaller fragments. The periphery of the rotor was not damaged. The six
vanes were found intact with slight chips missing from the outboard corner at the driven
end of two of the vanes. The cooling fins sustained impact damage on the side of the
pump opposite the OUT port.
Left-Side Attitude Indicator
The following components from the left-side attitude indicator/flight director were
identified in the wreckage: the gyroscopic rotor, the rotor case cap, two pieces of the rotor
case, the instrument face display (including the roll ring), and pieces of the instrument
case frame. (See figure 3 for a photograph of an exemplar attitude indicator and its
components.) The model of the attitude indicator installed on the accident airplane
contained an arm that provides mechanical linkage from the rotor housing to the pilot’s
display. This arm was located on a fragment of the instrument case frame.
43 A braze joint is formed by distributing filler metal between closely fitted surfaces through capillary
action.
NTSB/AAB-02/02

22
Figure 3. Photograph of an exemplar attitude indicator and its components.
Examination of the interior diameter of the rotor case revealed faint, unevenly
spaced diagonal scratches. The measured angle between the scratches and the direction of
rotation was between 4.0° and 5.2°. The scratches were consistent with the direction of
rotation of the rotor and with the direction the rotor was moving when it exited the case.
No other circumferential score marks were found on the inner surface of the case that
paralleled the direction of rotation.
Diagonal marks were found on the end of the rotor. Nearly all of the other
scratches on the cap were oriented across the direction of rotation at various angles. The
center fastener hole on the cap was ripped, with more than half of the periphery remaining.
The width of the tears matched the width of the gouges in the rotor. The exterior of the
cap contained scratches that resembled the width and approximate locations of the
motion-limiting stop wires mounted on an exemplar instrument.
Damage on the facial roll ring resembled the shape of the triangular airplane
support housing and the roll index that had been fixed to the instrument case. The relative
positions of the damage resembling the triangular support and roll index were on the top
and bottom of the ring, respectively, when it was placed at an inverted display of attitude.
The face of the instrument was placed behind that of an exemplar instrument and, using
the damage on the roll ring for alignment, the marks were within 2° of a wings-level
inverted attitude. (See figure 4.)
NTSB/AAB-02/02

23
Ground
(brown)
Horizon
Line
Sky
(blue)
Figure 4. Photograph showing the face of the accident airplane’s primary attitude
indicator behind that of an exemplar instrument.
Right-Side Attitude Indicator
The following components from the right-side attitude indicator were found: the
gyroscopic rotor, the rotor case cap, two pieces of the rotor case, the instrument face
display, and portions of the instrument case frame. The instrument display was found
separated into three pieces: the football-shaped facial card, the background horizon, and
the roll ring.
Two pieces of the rotor case contained light diagonal surface scratches that
measured between 2.0° and 5.1° from the direction of rotation. The scratches were
consistent with the direction of rotation of the rotor and with the direction the rotor was
moving when it exited the case. The lower left corner of the surface contained heavier
scuff marks, and the lower edges of the scuff marks were at an angle of about 6°, right end
up, from the direction of rotation. A scratch located over the scuffed area was
perpendicular to the direction of rotation.
The end of the gyroscopic rotor and the rotor case cap contained light diagonal
marks. No complete circumferential marks were found around the surface of the rotor.
The interior of the rotor case cap did not contain an imprint of the rotor like the one
observed on the cap from the left-side attitude indicator. The material from around the
central fastener hole was found displaced to one side, and the cap had an impression on
one edge.
NTSB/AAB-02/02

24
Marks on the facial card were matched up with the airplane silhouette in both pitch
and roll. Depending on the placement of the airplane, the marks ranged between a 8.4° to
11.8° right-wing-down position at between a -11° to -13° (nose-down) pitch. A paper
tracing of the airplane housing cover was moved along the ring. When lined up, one set of
marks indicated a 5° right-wing-down position. A second set of pitch-and-roll markings
were found on other fragments. The other set of marks were offset to the right of the path
that the pitch display would normally travel, and alignment in this plane could only have
occurred if the parts had been released from the normal assembly.
Fuel Testing
After the accident, fuel samples were taken from the truck that refueled the
accident airplane before its departure from CPS and from the airplane’s fuel supply tank.
Fuel testing conducted by the Missouri State Highway Patrol Crime Laboratory and
Phillips 66 Company revealed no problems with the fuel.44
AIRPLANE PERFORMANCE
An aircraft performance study was conducted by the Safety Board using FAA
airport surveillance radar data obtained from the St. Louis Lambert International Airport,
St. Louis, Missouri, and from the Scott Air Force Base, Belleville, Illinois. Air route
surveillance radar data from the FAA’s St. Louis Air Route Traffic Control Center and
weather data, including winds aloft information, were also used.
At 1920:07, when the pilot first declared that he was having a problem with the
airplane’s primary attitude indicator, the airplane was climbing through an altitude of
3,000 feet. (See figure 5 for a plot of the ground track for the accident airplane’s last
12 minutes of flight.) The calculated indicated airspeed of the airplane during the climb
was between 140 and 150 knots. The airplane leveled off slightly and then continued to
climb at a slower climb rate as it turned left to a heading of approximately 150°
by 1921:10. The airplane remained on this heading for about 2minutes.
At 1923:55, the St. Louis LW controller instructed the pilot to turn right to a
heading of270°, and, at 1924:04, the controller instructed the pilot to climb to and
maintain 7,000 feet. The airplane began the climb and turned right maintaining about a
3.5°-per-second heading change. Calculations show that this turn required an airplane
bank angle of 30° and that the airspeed increased to greater than 150 knots. The turn was
completed at an altitude of about 5,000 feet, and the airplane continued the climb at
120 knots. By 1928:00, the airplane reached 7,000feet at a heading of about 300° as the
airspeed accelerated to 150 knots. At 1928:30, the airplane began a left turn to the
southeast to a heading of about 140° at an altitude that varied between 7,100 and
7,400 feet. The calculated bank angle in the turn was about 25°.
44 For more information about the fuel test results, see the Fuel Report in the public docket for this
accident.
NTSB/AAB-02/02

25
Figure 5. Ground track of the accident airplane’s last 12 minutes of flight.
Following the LW controller’s instruction to make a slow right turn at 1930:37, the
airplane began turning to the right. Calculations reveal that, during the turn, the airplane
descended to about 6,800 feet while maintaining an airspeed of about 150 knots. The
airplane then descended to about 6,500 feet and then climbed at over 3,000 feet per minute
(fpm) for the next several seconds. The airspeed was calculated to be about 120 knots
during the climb, with a bank angle of approximately 25°. At 1931:31, the airplane
reached its maximum altitude of 7,700 feet.
After reaching 7,700 feet with a calculated pitch angle of 15.5° nose up with a
25° right bank, the airplane began a steep descent. The last radar return occurred at
1931:57, when the airplane was at 2,700 feet. At this point, the calculated descent rate
was about 26,000 fpm, the calculated airspeed was greater than 300 knots, and the airplane
was at approximately a 60° nose-down attitude.
NTSB/AAB-02/02

26
ADDITIONAL INFORMATION
Spatial Disorientation
One purpose for instrument training and maintaining instrument proficiency is to
prevent a pilot from being misled by several types of hazardous illusions that are peculiar
to flight. Under IFR conditions, an aircraft’s attitude can only be determined accurately by
observing and interpreting the flight instruments and rejecting the bodily sensations
associated with the aircraft’s movement, which can be exacerbated by head movements.
Practice and experience in instrument flying are necessary to help pilots ignore or
overcome false sensations.
The FAA Instrument Flying Handbook (FAA-H-8083-15) describes one of the
major illusions leading to spatial disorientation as follows:
Coriolis Illusion
The pilot has been in a turn long enough for the fluid in the ear canal to
move at the same speed as the canal. A movement of the head in a different
plane, such as looking at something in a different part of the cockpit, may
set the fluid moving, thereby creating the strong illusion of turning or
accelerating on an entirely different axis…This action causes the pilot to
think the aircraft is doing a maneuver that it is not. The disoriented pilot
may maneuver the aircraft into a dangerous attitude in an attempt to correct
the aircraft’s perceived attitude.
For this reason, it is important that pilots develop an instrument
cross-check or scan that involves minimal head movement.
The Aeronautical Information Manual (AIM) describes the coriolis illusion as the
“most overwhelming of all illusions in flight” and states that it “may be prevented by not
making sudden, extreme head movements, particularly while making prolonged constant
rate turns under IFR conditions.”45
Partial Panel and Instrument Meteorological Conditions Flight
Training Requirements
The Instrument Airplane Rating Practical Test Standard for 2000 requires that the
instrument rating applicant do the following:
• exhibit the knowledge of recognizing whether an attitude indicator and/or
heading indicator is inaccurate or inoperative,
• advise anytime the aircraft is unable to comply with a clearance, and
45 For more information about illusions leading to spatial disorientation, see AIM, Chapter 8-1-5(b).
NTSB/AAB-02/02

27
• demonstrate a nonprecision instrument approach without gyro attitude and
heading indicators.
Title 14 CFR Section 61.57, “Recent Flight Experience: Pilot in Command [PIC],”
Paragraph (c), “Instrument Experience,” states that to act as PIC under IFR, or in weather
conditions less than the minimums prescribed for VFR, the person must have
accomplished the following, within the preceding 6 months:
performed and logged under actual or simulated instrument conditions, either
in flight in the appropriate category of aircraft for the instrument privileges
sought or in a flight simulator or flight training device that is representative of
the aircraft category for the instrument privileges sought --:
• at least six instrument approaches;
• holding procedures; and
• intercepting and tracking courses through the use of navigation systems.[46]
FAA Procedures and Guidance Regarding ATC Handling of
Aircraft in Emergency Situations
FAA Order 7110.65, “Air Traffic Control,” Chapter 10, “Emergencies,” provides
controllers with the following guidance on recognizing and handling emergency
situations:
10-1-1 Emergency Determinations
An emergency can be either a Distress[47] or an Urgency[48] condition as
defined in the “Pilot/Controller Glossary.”…If…you are in doubt that a
situation constitutes an emergency or potential emergency, handle it as
though it were an emergency.…Because of the infinite variety of possible
emergency situations, specific procedures cannot be prescribed. However,
when you believe an emergency exists or is imminent, select and pursue a
course of action which appears to be most appropriate under the
circumstances and which most nearly conforms to the instructions in this
manual.
10-1-2 Obtaining Information
Obtain enough information to handle the emergency intelligently. Base
your decision as to what type of assistance is needed on information and
46 As stated previously, the Safety Board could not determine if the pilot had met the requirements of
14 CFR Section 61.57.
47 The “Pilot/Controller Glossary” defines distress as a condition of being threatened by serious and/or
imminent danger and of requiring immediate assistance.
48 The “Pilot/Controller Glossary” defines urgency as a condition of being concerned about safety and
of requiring timely but not immediate assistance; a potential distress condition.
NTSB/AAB-02/02

28
requests received from the pilot because he/she is authorized by 14 [CFR]
Part 91 to determine a course of action.
10-1-3 Providing Assistance
Provide maximum assistance to aircraft in distress. Enlist the services of
available radar facilities...as well as their emergency services and facilities,
when the pilot requests or when you deem necessary.
Further, FAA Order 7110.65 contains procedures that enable ATC to render
assistance by minimizing pilot workload during inadvertent operation in IMC.
Specifically, Paragraph 10-2-9, “Radar Assistance Techniques,”49 states the following:
Use the following techniques to the extent possible when you provide radar
assistance to a pilot not qualified to operate in IFR conditions:
a. Avoid radio frequency changes except when necessary to provide a clear
communications channel.
b. Make turns while the aircraft is in VFR conditions so it will be in a
position to fly a straight course while in IFR conditions.
c. Have pilot lower gear and slow aircraft to approach speed while in VFR
conditions.
d. Avoid requiring a climb or descent while in a turn if in IFR conditions.
e. Avoid abrupt maneuvers.
f. Vector aircraft to VFR conditions.
FAA Order 7110.65 also specifies other procedures and techniques for assisting
pilots in difficulty, including “no-gyro” vector procedures, which provide a defined
method for controllers to issue heading changes to aircraft that have a defective
gyroscopic instrument, such as an attitude indicator. The procedure entails the pilot
making turns at no greater than the standard rate when instructed to do so by the controller.
Further, instead of providing the pilot with headings to be flown, the controller should
observe the radar track and issue control instructions “turn right/left” or “stop turn” as
appropriate.
49 Although the procedures in FAA Order 7110.65, Paragraph 10-2-9, do not directly apply to
situations in which IFR aircraft experience instrument failures, a reasonable and prudent controller would be
expected to use such procedures in these situations.
NTSB/AAB-02/02

29
ANALYSIS
General
The pilot received current and adequate weather information before conducting the
accident flight.
Instrument meteorological conditions (IMC) prevailed at the time of the accident,
which occurred at night in dark lighting conditions, turbulence, and rain.
The pilot was properly certificated and qualified to operate a multiengine airplane
in IMC in accordance with applicable Federal regulations. However, because the pilot
made no pilot logbook entries during the 6months preceding the accident, it could not be
determined if he met the instrument currency requirements to act as pilot-in-command in
IMC.
The airplane was properly certificated and equipped in accordance with Federal
regulations and approved procedures.
The pilot remained in contact with air traffic control (ATC) facilities and a
transponder code was transmitted to ground-based radar sites throughout the flight,
indicating that the airplane did not experience an in-flight electrical failure.
Examination of the airframe and engines did not reveal any preexisting mechanical
failures or malfunctions in the structure or powerplants.
There was no evidence that medical issues or pilot fatigue contributed to the
accident.
Radar data, ATC transmissions, and other evidence indicate that the pilot lost
control of the airplane at 7,700 feet as he was making a climbing right turn.
Examination and distribution of the wreckage revealed that the airplane remained
intact and was in an upright attitude when it contacted trees at a velocity of over 300 knots
and then impacted rocky terrain.
Role of Malfunctioning Attitude Indicator
The pilot indicated to ATC several times that he was having problems with the
airplane’s primary attitude indicator. He also told ATC that he was trying to use the
right-side attitude indicator, which indicates that the airplane did not experience a total
vacuum system failure. Examination of the wreckage revealed rotational marks in the left
and right engine vacuum pumps, which indicates that they were most likely functioning at
NTSB/AAB-02/02

30
the time of impact. Further, one of the vacuum gage system failure indicator buttons
exhibited evidence of having been in almost the fully retracted position (the other
indicator button was found in the partially retracted position), which indicates that
adequate vacuum existed for the airplane’s instruments to operate.50
On the basis of the examination of the left-side (primary) attitude indicator, it was
determined that the rotor was most likely spinning, but not at a high enough rpm to keep
the display erect (the wreckage fragments of the left-side attitude indicator clearly aligned
in an inverted attitude), indicating that this attitude indicator was not displaying properly
at the time of impact. Although the pilot reported that his primary attitude indicator had
failed and examination of the attitude indicator supported that such a failure had occurred,
the investigation could not determine the cause of the failure in that instrument.
On the basis of the examination of the right-side attitude indicator, it was
determined that the rotor was spinning, the display was erect when the airplane made
initial contact with the trees, and the attitude it displayed was consistent with the airplane’s
attitude when it struck the trees (as determined by an inspection of the accident site and a
three-dimensional model of the airplane’s flightpath through the trees), indicating that this
attitude indicator was functioning properly until the time of impact.
After first reporting that the primary attitude indicator was malfunctioning, the
pilot continued flight for about 11 minutes, including two controlled heading changes,
indicating that the pilot had functioning cockpit instruments and that he could control the
airplane. Further, in the event that an instrument malfunction occurs, instrument flight
rules (IFR)-qualified pilots are trained to use other relevant instruments, which evidence
indicates were operating on the accident airplane (the right-side attitude indicator).
Therefore, the loss of the primary attitude indicator alone does not explain why the pilot
lost control of the airplane and crashed.
However, the right-side attitude indicator was not large and would have been
several feet to the right of the pilot. Therefore, using the right-side attitude indicator would
have resulted in the pilot making frequent, rapid head movements to cross-check that
instrument with the other instruments. The pilot’s head movements most likely caused him
to experience spatial disorientation. Further, the rain conditions in which the pilot was
maneuvering would have increased the noise level in the cockpit, and the presence of
turbulence would have made it more difficult to control the airplane with failed
instrumentation, both of which would likely have exacerbated the pilot’s spatial
disorientation.
50 Pump tests show that a single vacuum pump can provide adequate pressure and flow capacity if the
other pump has become inoperative and the flapper valve has failed in the open position. For more
information, see the January 9, 2002, addendum to the Systems Group Chairman’s Factual Report.
NTSB/AAB-02/02

31
Air Traffic Controller Actions
The procedures in FAA Order 7110.65, “Air Traffic Control,” Paragraph 10-2-9,
“Radar Assistance Techniques,” do not directly apply to situations in which IFR aircraft
experience instrument failures. However, a reasonable and prudent controller would be
expected to use such procedures in these situations.51 Pilots who conduct flights under IFR
compensate for the absence of visual cues by using aircraft attitude information obtained
from instruments such as a heading indicator, an attitude indicator, and a turn coordinator.
If these instruments or their power sources fail, it can be difficult for the pilot to maintain
control of the aircraft. Services provided by a radar ATC facility can replace some of the
information provided by gyroscopic instruments, such as course and turn trend
information.
A review of the ATC recording revealed that when the pilot first stated that he was
having some problems with the airplane’s primary attitude indicator at 1920:07, a great
deal of background noise was also recorded, which made the pilot’s comment unclear and
likely prevented the controller from hearing this portion of the pilot’s transmission. During
that transmission, the pilot also asked to be assigned a higher altitude, which could be
heard clearly on the ATC recording. At 1920:16, the controller responded to this request,
stating, “I’ll have a higher climb in about two miles.”
At 1920:11, the pilot again indicated that he was having a problem with the
airplane’s primary attitude indicator. At 1921:20, the controller advised the pilot to try and
fly the airplane level on any heading and told him that he would try to get him to as high
an altitude as possible. The controller’s instructions were prudent for handling an airplane
in this situation.
At 1922:50, the pilot made his first request to be diverted to Jefferson City
Memorial Airport (JEF). In response, the controller issued the pilot a heading of 120°,52
which would not have directed the airplane toward JEF, rather it would have directed the
airplane toward EIW. This action and the controller’s postaccident statement that he was
surprised when the pilot asked to be diverted the second time (at 1923:46) because he
thought the pilot wanted assistance to continue to EIW indicates that the controller did not
understand or hear the pilot’s first request. At 1923:39, the controller issued a climb
clearance to the pilot, stating, “climb and maintain seven thousand at pilot discretion.”
The controller’s use of the phrase, “at pilot discretion,” allowed the pilot to initiate a climb
51 Specifically, these procedures advise air traffic controllers to avoid requiring an airplane to climb or
descend while in a turn if in IFR conditions, avoid issuing abrupt maneuvers, and vector aircraft to visual
flight rules (VFR) conditions. Further, FAA Order 7110.65 contains “no-gyro” vector procedures for
assisting pilots in difficulty, which state that the air traffic controller should observe the radar track and issue
control instructions “turn right/left” or “stop turn” instead of issuing headings to be flown. The procedures
also state that the pilot should make turns at the standard rate (3° of heading change per second). Such
procedures help minimize the pilot’s workload and head movements (which, as stated previously, can
aggravate spatial disorientation).
52 The controller’s issuance of a specific compass heading was not an optimal response for assisting an
airplane with a gyroscopic instrument problem. However, ATC radar indicate that the airplane continued in a
steady, straight climb for several minutes after the controller made this instruction.
NTSB/AAB-02/02

32
at any point or rate that he wished to help prevent him from having to make a climbing
turn, which indicates that the controller recognized the seriousness of the situation and
used good operating practices for assisting a pilot flying an airplane with instrument
difficulty. Radar data indicate that the pilot elected to initiate the climb immediately after
receiving the clearance from the controller.
After the pilot’s second request (at 1923:46) that he wanted to divert to JEF, the
controller responded, stating, “in that case turn right heading two seven zero.”53 At
1924:00, the pilot asked the controller to confirm the assigned altitude, and, the controller
responded, “climb and maintain seven thousand.” Radar data indicate that the airplane
continued to climb after this transmission and started the turn that the pilot had requested.
After this exchange, the controller directed his attention to another airplane for
about 1minute. At 1925:12, the controller informed the pilot of N8354N that “you’re
basically going in a good direction.” ATC radar indicate that for about 3 1/2 minutes after
this transmission, the airplane flew on a course and at an altitude consistent with the
controller’s instructions.
At 1928:36, the controller asked the pilot, “you have any more attitude problems,”
and the pilot responded, “the attitude problems are continuing.” ATC radar show that the
airplane entered a left turn to the southeast as the pilot was making this statement. At
1929:31, the pilot requested “vectors…[to] get down VFR.” During postaccident
interviews, the controller stated that he became concerned when the pilot requested
vectors to VFR conditions and that, in his opinion, the pilot did not convey a sense of
urgency until he made this request. Further, the controller stated that after the pilot made
this request, he observed N8354N’s target on the radar turn left back into “weather,” at
which point, he became very concerned.
At 1929:41, the controller instructed the pilot of N8354N to “just go straight
ahead…doesn’t make any difference what direction that is just go straight ahead.”
Although the controller did not advise the pilot of the southeasterly turn or attempt to
determine why the pilot was deviating from his intended destination (JEF), he did start
applying no-gyro vector procedures, which was an appropriate and prudent response. ATC
radar show that after the controller made this instruction, the airplane appeared to be
stabilized on the southeasterly course at a level altitude for about 1 minute. While on this
course, the controller continued to issue no-gyro vector instructions, stating, “make a slow
right turn as as much as you can the standard rate.” ATC radar data indicate that the
airplane started to make a slow right turn after this instruction. At 1931:22, the controller
continued issuing no-gyro vector instructions, stating, “just stop your turn and go straight
ahead you’re doing fine.” ATC radar show that, shortly thereafter, the airplane began its
rapid descent.
53 Again, the controller’s issuance of a specific compass heading was not an optimal response in this
situation. However, ATC radar again indicate that the airplane continued in steady, straight flight after the
controller made this turn instruction.
NTSB/AAB-02/02

33
In summary, although the controller continued to issue specific compass heading
instructions to the pilot after he determined that the airplane’s primary attitude indicator
was malfunctioning at 1920:11, ATC radar data show that the pilot made the turns as
instructed and flew straight and level for several minutes after making the turns.
Therefore, the Safety Board determined that these turn instructions did not cause or
contribute to the pilot’s spatial disorientation. Further, although the controller did not give
the pilot the information about his southeasterly heading or try to determine why the pilot
made the turn and given that the pilot responded to the controller’s instructions, the Board
determined that this omission did not cause or exacerbate the pilot’s spatial disorientation.
Therefore, the controller’s actions were not considered to be a contributing factor.
