Crash During Approach to Landing
Business Jet Services, Ltd.
Gulfstream G-1159A (G-III), N85VT
Houston, Texas
November 22, 2004
aaaaavvvvviiiiiaaaaatttttiiiiiooooonnnnn
ACCIDENT BRIEF
NTSB/AAB-06/06
PB2007-100699



Aircraft Accident Brief
Crash During Approach to Landing
Business Jet Services, Ltd.
Gulfstream G-1159A (G-III), N85VT
Houston, Texas
November 22, 2004
A L T RAN SPOR
N T
ATI O E PLURIBUS UNUM A T IO
N N
S AFETYBO ARD
NTSB/AAB-06/06
PB2007-100699 National Transportation Safety Board
Notation 7828 490 L’Enfant Plaza, S.W.
Adopted November 2, 2006 Washington, D.C. 20594

National Transportation Safety Board. 2006. Crash During Approach to Landing Business Jet
Services, Ltd., Gulfstream G-1159A (G-III), N85VT, Houston, Texas, November 22, 2004. Aircraft
Accident Brief NTSB/AAB-06/06. Washington, DC.
The National Transportation Safety Board is an independent Federal agency dedicated to promoting aviation, railroad, highway, marine,
pipeline, and hazardous materials safety. Established in 1967, the agency is mandated by Congress through the Independent Safety Board
Act of 1974 to investigate transportation accidents, determine the probable causes of the accidents, issue safety recommendations, study
transportation safety issues, and evaluate the safety effectiveness of government agencies involved in transportation. The Safety Board
makes public its actions and decisions through accident reports, safety studies, special investigation reports, safety recommendations, and
statistical reviews.
Recent publications are available in their entirety on the Web at <http://www.ntsb.gov>. Other information about available publications also
may be obtained from the Web site or by contacting:
National Transportation Safety Board
Records Management Division, CIO-40
490 L’Enfant Plaza, S.W.
Washington, D.C. 20594
(800) 877-6799 or (202) 314-6551
Safety Board publications may be purchased, by individual copy or by subscription, from the National Technical Information Service. To
purchase this publication, order report number PB2007-100699 from:
National Technical Information Service
5285 Port Royal Road
Springfield, Virginia 22161
(800) 553-6847 or (703) 605-6000
The Independent Safety Board Act, as codified at 49 U.S.C. Section 1154(b), precludes the admission into evidence or use of Board reports
related to an incident or accident in a civil action for damages resulting from a matter mentioned in the report.

iii Aircraft Accident Report
Contents
History Of Flight. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1
Personnel Information . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 7
The Captain. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 7
The First Officer. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 8
Airplane Information. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 9
Cockpit Instrumentation. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 9
Ground Proximity Warning System. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11
Meterorological Information. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11
Airport Information. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
Minimum Safe Altitude Warning Information. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
Flight Recorders . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14
Wreckage And Impact Information . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14
Medical And Pathological Information . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14
Tests And Research . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15
Organizational and Management Information . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15
Instrument Precision Approach and Landing Guidance. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15
Maintenance Records . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 16
Federal Aviation Administration Surveillance. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 16
Safety Recommendation A-05-08 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 17
Additional Information . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 17
Analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 18
General . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 18
Accident Sequence . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 18
Minimum Safe Altitude Warning Operation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 21
Probable Cause. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 21



National Transportation Safety Board
Washington, D.C. 20594
Aircraft Accident Brief
Accident Number: DCA05MA011
Aircraft and Registration: Gulfstream III, N85VT
Location: Houston, Texas
Date: November 22, 2004
Adopted On: November 2, 2006
HISTORY OF FLIGHT
On November 22, 2004, about 0615 central standard time,1 a Gulfstream G-1159A
(G-III), N85VT, operated by Business Jet Services Ltd., struck a light pole and crashed
about 3 miles southwest of William P. Hobby Airport (HOU), Houston, Texas, while on an
instrument landing system (ILS)2 approach to runway 4. The two pilots and the flight
attendant were killed, an individual in a vehicle near the airport received minor injuries,
and the airplane was destroyed by impact forces. The airplane was being operated under
the provisions of 14Code of Federal Regulations (CFR) Part91 on an instrument flight
rules flight plan. Instrument meteorological conditions (IMC) prevailed at the time of the
accident.
The accident flight was scheduled to depart from Dallas Love Field Airport
(DAL), Dallas, Texas, about 0500 as a positioning flight to HOU. The flight crew planned
to pick up former President George H.W. Bush and other passengers at HOU and transport
them to Guayaquil, Ecuador. The flight was scheduled to depart HOU about0654.
The flight departed DAL about 0530. According to Business Jet Services’ Flight
Operations and Charter Sales Manager, the departure was delayed because of poor
weather conditions at HOU and DAL. The captain was the flying pilot, and the first
officer performed the nonflying pilot duties.
At 0543:32, the flight crew received HOU automatic terminal information service
(ATIS) information “Quebec,” which reported that the winds were calm, the visibility was
1 Unless otherwise indicated, all times in this report are central standard time based on a 24-hour
clock.
2 The ILS consists of a localizer and a glideslope, which provide lateral and vertical guidance,
respectively, during an approach. Cockpit instrumentation shows the airplane’s location relative to the
glideslope and localizer signals. Displacement is shown in terms of the airplane’s angular deviation above or
below the glideslope and left or right of the localizer. Pilots can judge the amount of displacement by needle
deflections that reference “dots” on the face of the instruments.

2
1/8statute mile (sm) in fog, the runway visual range (RVR)3 for runway 4 was variable between
1,600 and 2,400 feet, and the clouds were broken at 100 feet and overcast at 9,000feet.4 At
0547:50, the cockpit voice recorder (CVR) recorded the first officer starting the approach
briefing. About 3 minutes later, the CVR recorded a discussion between the pilots about entering
the navigational approach fixes CARCO, ELREN, EISEN, and Hobby (HUB) very high
frequency omnidirectional range (VOR) in the airplane’s flight management system (FMS). The
captain asked, “we can probably delete HUB though, can’t we?” The first officer replied, “yeah,
we could ‘cause we’re gonna have that on here for our missed [approach point].” (See figure 1 for
the runway 4 ILS published approach chart.)
At 0558:50, the first officer contacted the Houston Terminal Radar Approach Control
(TRACON) and reported, “approach…Gulfstream eight five Victor Tango’s with you out of one
eight zero for one one thousand [feet], [ATIS] information ‘Kilo.’”5 The controller cleared the
flight directly to CARCO, adding, “when you’re able for the ILS runway four.” The first officer
acknowledged the transmission; however, he read back, “ILS runway one four” instead of “
runway four.” He then stated, “I’ll set up our ILS, in here, one oh nine nine.”
At 0605:05, the Houston TRACON controller instructed the flight crew to descend to and
maintain 3,000 feet. Radar data indicated that, about this time, the airplane was at an altitude of
about 11,000feet and was located about 29miles northwest of HOU. At 0609:33, the first officer
started the before landing checklist, and, about 1 minute later, he stated, “five miles…from
CARCO.” At 0610:43, the controller instructed the flight crew to turn left heading 070° and to
maintain an altitude of “2,000 feet or above ‘til established [on the] localizer.” The controller then
cleared the flight for the ILS runway 4 approach. At 0611:13, the first officer stated, “localizer’s
alive.” (See figure 2 for the accident airplane’s ground track.)
3 The RVR is the measurement of the visibility near the runway’s surface. The measurement represents the
horizontal distance that a pilot should be able to see down a runway from the approach end.
4 Altitudes referenced in this report from surface weather observations and terminal aerodrome forecasts are
reported as height above ground level. All other altitudes referenced in this report are reported as height above mean
sea level.
5 As noted previously, the first officer had actually received ATIS information “Quebec.”
NTSB/AAB-06/06

3
Figure 1. ILS runway 4 published approach chart. (Reproduced with permission of Jeppesen
Sanderson, Inc. Not to be used for navigation.)
NTSB/AAB-06/06

4
Figure 2. Accident airplane’s ground track.
An airplane performance study conducted by the National Transportation Safety Board
indicated that, about 0611, the airplane was descending through an altitude of about 2,900 feet on
a southeasterly heading when it started turning left to converge on the ILS localizer. The airplane
continued descending during the inbound turn and leveled off at an altitude of about 2,300 feet. At
0611:41, the Houston TRACON controller instructed the flight crew to contact the HOU air
traffic control tower (ATCT). About 16 seconds later, the first officer contacted the HOU ATCT
and stated, “with you on the ILS.” The ATCT controller reported calm winds and then cleared the
flight to land on runway 4. The performance study indicated that, about this time, the airplane was
still at an altitude of about 2,300 feet and was located about 11 miles southwest of HOU.
NTSB/AAB-06/06

5
At 0612:15, the captain asked the first officer to get the RVR. He then stated, “I can’t get
approach [APR] mode on my thing.”6 The first officer replied that he could not get the APR mode
to activate either. About 0613, the airplane descended through 2,000feet. The airplane
performance study showed that the airplane was about 1,000 feet below the glideslope about this
time and that the airplane remained 600 to 1,000 feet below the glideslope until impact.
At 0612:31, the HOU ATCT controller reported to the first officer that the RVR was
1,600feet.7 The first officer acknowledged the transmission. At 0612:40, the first officer stated,
“gear down.” At 0612:57, the first officer asked, “what [is]…wrong with this?” The captain
responded, “I don’t know.” At 0613:03, the first officer further asked, “what do we have set
wrong? we have…long range [navigation or NAV] or something… that we shouldn’t have?” Five
seconds later, the captain reported, “got NAV…VOR one.” The first officer stated, “okay, we’re
high on the glideslope now,” and the captain replied, “just gonna have to do it this way.” At
0613:24, the first officer stated, “guess so. yeah you’re on [the] glideslope now.” However, the
airplane performance study showed that, about the time that the first officer made the comments
about the glideslope, the airplane was at an altitude of about 1,700 feet and was 700 feet below the
glideslope. (See figure 3 for the accident airplane’s altitude profile.)
At 0613:44, the captain asked the first officer if they were going to descend to an altitude
of 244feet,8 and the first officer replied, “yeah.” The airplane performance study indicated that,
about 0614, the airplane was at an altitude of about 1,000 feet. At 0614:05, the captain asked,
“what happened? did you change my frequency?” The first officer responded, “yeah we were
down there…the VOR frequency was on.” He then stated, “we’re all squared away now…you got
it.” The captain responded, “yeah, but I, I don’t know if I can get back on it in time.” The first
officer replied, “yeah you will…you’re squared away now.” The airplane performance study
showed that, shortly after the captain’s question regarding the frequency, the airplane turned right
and subsequently intersected the ILS runway 4 localizer centerline. As shown in figure 3, about
this time, the airplane was at an altitude of about 900 feet and was 800 feet below the glideslope.
6 The airplane has an autopilot/flight director mode selector panel, and the APR mode provides flight guidance
during an ILS approach.
7 According to the published ILS runway 4 approach chart (see figure 1), the minimum allowable RVR for an
ILS approach to runway 4 is 1,800 feet. Under 14 CFR Part 91 operations, pilots are allowed to initiate an approach
when the reported visibility is below minimums.
8 Two hundred forty-four feet is the decision height for the ILS runway 4 approach.
NTSB/AAB-06/06

6
Figure 3. Accident airplane’s altitude profile.
At 0614:32, the first officer stated, “I’m, I’m outside,” and, 8 seconds later, he stated,
“okay, comin’ up on two forty four.” At 0614:35, the automated radar terminal system minimum
safe altitude warning (MSAW) provided visual and aural warnings to the Houston TRACON and
HOU ATCT controllers. At 0614:42, the captain completed the before landing checklist, stating,
“give me full flaps.” At 0614:45.2, the CVR recorded the first officer state, “up,” seven times in
quick succession. The CVR recorded the HOU ATCT controller simultaneously state, “check
your altitude, altitude indicates four hundred feet.” The flight crew did not respond to the
controller’s transmission. No further communications were received from the flight crew.
The airplane performance study showed that the airplane tracked the ILS runway 4
localizer and continued to descend until about 0614:47. The airplane impacted a light pole at an
altitude of about 198 feet and about 3 1/4 miles from the runway 4 threshold.
NTSB/AAB-06/06

7
PERSONNEL INFORMATION
The Captain
The captain, age 67, was hired by Business Jet Services on May 1, 1998. The captain was
the company’s chief pilot from February 15, 2000, to July 31, 2004.9 He held a multiengine airline
transport pilot certificate with type ratings in the British Aircraft Corporation (BAC) 1-11 and the
G-III. The captain received a check airman designation from the Federal Aviation Administration
(FAA) effective December 10, 2002, and he was approved to conduct flight checks for Business
Jet Services pilots in G-III and BAC1-11 series airplanes. The captain’s most recent FAA
first-class airman medical certificate was issued on June17, 2004, and contained the limitation
that he “must wear corrective lenses.” Table 1 shows the employment information reported by the
captain on the application that he filled out for Business Jet Services.
Table 1. Employment information for the captain.
Employment date Employer Job position Airplane type
June 1976 to July 1989 Jet Fleet Corporation, Line captain, instructor, and BAC 1-11
Dallas, Texas check airman
August 1989 to March 1990 Flight International, Newport Line captain, instructor, and BAC 1-11
News, Virginia check airman
April to October 1990 Self Freelance pilot
October 1990 to April 1998 Sky King, Inc., Sacramento, Captain, check airman, BAC 1-11
California director of operations
Business Jet Services records indicated that the captain had accumulated about
19,000total flight hours, 15,700 hours of which were as pilot-in-command. The captain had
accumulated 1,000 hours in Gulfstream G-II and G-III airplanes, 1hour and 55 hours of which
were flown in the accident airplane in the 6 and 12 months preceding the accident, respectively.
The captain had flown about 400, 90, 10, 3, and 0.75 (the accident flight) hours in the last
12months; 90, 30, and 7days; and 24 hours, respectively. The captain’s last ground training
occurred on May 18, 2004, and his last G-III proficiency check occurred on May20, 2004.
According to the captain’s wife, the captain did not work on November 20 and 21. She
stated that the captain typically went to bed about 2230 to 2300 and awoke about 0800 on days
that he did not work. On November 21, he awoke about 0800 and went to bed about 2100. On the
morning of the accident, the captain awoke about 0220. According to a company employee, the
captain arrived at DAL about 0300, and he stated that the captain looked like he had just woken
up because he was “slow moving.” Four company line service personnel described the captain’s
actions as “normal.”
9 According to the captain’s wife, he retired from the chief pilot position so that he could reduce his work
schedule.
NTSB/AAB-06/06

8
The First Officer
The first officer, age 62, was hired by Business Jet Services on April 19, 2004. He was the
company’s chief pilot from July31, 2004, to the accident date. He held a single- and multiengine
airline transport pilot certificate with type ratings in Sabreliner N-265, Cessna Citation CE-500,
Hawker Siddeley HS-125, and G-III airplanes. The first officer’s most recent FAA first-class
airman medical certificate was issued on September10, 2004, and contained the limitation that he
“must have available glasses for near/intermediate vision.” Table 2 shows the employment
information reported by the first officer on the application that he filled out for Business Jet
Services.
Table 2. Employment information for the first officer.
Employment date Employer Job position Airplane type
July 1974 to October 1979 Eliminator Boats, Mira Chief pilot Cessna 411 and
Lorna, California Turbo Aerostar
October 1979 to December 1987 Ledo Financial Flight department Sabreliner 60,
manager and Cheyenne III, and
chief pilot Cessna414
December 1987 to November 1997 Various companies Contract pilot Hawker Jets
November 1997 to October 2001 Elite Aviation, Van Nuys, Captain G-II, G-III, and
California Hawker Jets
December 2001 to September 2002 XtraJet, Inc., Santa Monica, Captain G-II
California
September 2002 to April 2004 AvJet, Burbank, California; Contract pilot G-II, G-III, and
Sun Air Jets, Camarillo, Hawker Jets
California; and XtraJet
Business Jet Services records indicated that the first officer had accumulated about
19,100total flight hours, 17,700 hours of which were as pilot-in-command. The first officer had
accumulated 1,700 hours in G-II and G-III airplanes, about 18 hours of which were flown in the
accident airplane in the 8 months preceding the accident. The first officer had flown about 300,
83, 24, 8, and 0.75 (the accident flight) hours in the last 12months; 90, 30, and 7days; and
24hours, respectively. The first officer’s last G-III proficiency check occurred on January 25,
2004; his last line check occurred on May 20, 2004; and his last ground training occurred on
May21, 2004.
According to the first officer’s wife, the first officer awoke about 0900 on November 20,
2004, and he went to bed about 2300. On November 21, the first officer awoke about 0900. The
first officer’s wife stated that the first officer did not have regular sleeping hours and, therefore,
she was not sure exactly what time the first officer went to bed that evening; however, she thought
that it was probably about 2000. According to company personnel, on the morning of the
NTSB/AAB-06/06

9
accident, the first officer arrived at DAL about 0430.10 Two line service technicians who saw him
on the morning of the accident stated that he “seemed in good spirits.”
AIRPLANE INFORMATION
The accident airplane was manufactured by Gulfstream Aerospace Corporation on
December 12, 1984. From October 1985 to March 1993, the airplane was operated by Jets
Ejecutivos in Mexico. The FAA issued the airplane a standard airworthiness certificate on
March3, 1993.11 The airplane was operated by five different operators from April 1993 to
August2000, when Business Jet Services bought the airplane. At the time of the accident, the
airplane had accumulated about 8,566 hours.
The airplane was equipped with two Rolls-Royce Spey 511-8 turbofan engines. The time
since new for the left engine was about 8,452 hours, and the time since overhaul was about
1,644hours. The time since new for the right engine was about 8,548hours, and the time since
overhaul was about 1,648 hours.
Cockpit Instrumentation
The airplane was equipped with an electronic flight instrument system (EFIS), which
consisted of two electronic displays, a symbol generator, a display controller, and a source
controller. The electronic attitude director indicator (EADI) has a fast/slow indicator that is
always visible and a glideslope indicator that is only visible when a valid ILS frequency has been
selected. If a valid frequency has not been selected, the side of the screen where the glideslope
indicator should appear remains blank. The fast/slow indicator shows airspeed guidance relative
to a target airspeed, and the glideslope indicator shows aircraft vertical deviation from the ILS
glideslope.
The glideslope and fast/slow indicators are the same color and about the same size. Each
indicator consists of a moving pointer on a rectangular display, and each display has markers
above and below the rectangle to indicate the degree of deviation. The glideslope pointer
resembles a blunt-point arrow, and the fast/slow pointer resembles a rectangle (see figure 4). The
accident airplane’s EADI was configured with the glideslope indicator on the left side and the
fast/slow indicator on the right side.12 A review of the Safety Board’s accident database revealed
10 The first officer’s wife was not sure what time he awoke on the morning of the accident, but she indicated that
he would have showered and then needed about 30 minutes to drive to the airport.
11 During a review of company records, several documents required by Federal regulations to import and operate
an airplane in the United States, including a transfer application, an export certificate of airworthiness, and a
conformity and acceptance inspection record, were not found for the accident airplane. Further, no maintenance
records were found for the time period that the accident airplane was operated in Mexico. Title 14 CFR 135.439
establishes the requirements for the retention of maintenance records.
12 FAA Advisory Circular (AC) 25-11, “Transport Category Airplane Electronic Display Systems,” dated
July16, 1987, provides guidance on the location of essential flight instrument displays, including the glideslope
indicator. The AC recommends standardizing the location of the glideslope indicator to the right side of the main
display; however, the accident airplane was manufactured before this guidance was issued. Five other company
airplanes flown by the accident pilots were configured with the glideslope indicator on the left side. Of these
airplanes, four had fast/slow indicators on the right side, and one had no indicator on the right side. Three of the
company airplanes flown by the accident pilots had the glideslope on the right side.
NTSB/AAB-06/06

10
no instances of accidents involving confusion of a different cockpit instrument with the glideslope
indicator.
Figure 4. A diagram of the EADI.
Note: The diagram shows the glideslope and the fast/slow indicators on the right and left side of the EADI, respectively, which is
opposite of the accident airplane’s configuration.
The EFIS source controller is used to select attitude, heading, navigation, and bearing
sources for display on the EADI. The NAV button on the source controller is used to control the
source of the very high frequency (VHF) NAV information. When a frequency is entered in the
VHF NAV receivers, it is stored in the standby position. The standby frequency can be activated
instantly by flipping a toggle switch located next to the frequency display. The display data
include the selected course and the course, localizer, and glideslope deviations.
The airplane was equipped with an autopilot/flight director mode selector panel. The APR
mode is used during an ILS approach. An ILS frequency must be selected as the NAV source and
valid ILS signals must be received for the APR mode to activate. When these conditions are met
and the APR button is pressed, both the NAV and APR modes are armed to capture the localizer
and glideslope, respectively. When the APR mode is activated, the flight director’s lateral and
vertical modes, including the glideslope and localizer captured and armed modes, are annunciated
on the top of the EADI display. According to CVR information, neither the first officer nor the
captain was initially able to activate the APR mode on their flight directors.
NTSB/AAB-06/06

11
The airplane was equipped with an FMS that had a multifunction display (MFD), which
was located on the center instrument panel and displayed navigational approach waypoints13 that
are entered into the FMS by the flight crew. As the airplane proceeds toward the airport, the
displayed waypoint numbers change position on the MFD relative to a fixed airplane symbol at
the bottom of the screen. An FMS does not provide the minimum altitudes for each navigational
approach waypoint and supplements the airplane’s other navigational guidance instruments.
Ground Proximity Warning System
The airplane was equipped with a Honeywell Mark VI ground proximity warning system
(GPWS), which provides aural alerts when thresholds are exceeded in several operational
modes.14 Specifically, an aural “too low terrain” alert will be generated when the airplane reaches
a specific allowable altitude for a given airspeed and the landing gear is down. Also, when a valid
glideslope frequency has been selected on the captain’s NAV receiver and the landing gear is
down, an aural “glideslope” alert will be generated and repeated every 3 seconds if the airplane
deviates below the glideslope by more than 1.3dots and if the altitude is below 1,000feet. The
“glideslope” alert gets louder as the airplane descends below 300 feet. If a valid ILS frequency
has not been selected on the NAV receiver, the “glideslope” alert is inhibited.
In addition, when the airplane descends below 500 and 200 feet and deviates below the
glideslope by more than 1.3dots and a valid ILS frequency has been selected, “500” and
“200” foot aural alerts will be generated. The GPWS also generates a “minimums” alert when the
airplane descends to the decision height (DH) selected by the flight crew. The CVR did not record
any GPWS alerts during the accident flight.
An avionics functional check of the GPWS, which consists of a self-test and audio level
check, is conducted by maintenance personnel every 12 months. The last maintenance functional
check of the accident GPWS occurred on April 2, 2004, and no discrepancies were noted.
According to the director of training at Business Jet Services, company pilots also perform
preflight avionics functional checks. The director, who had flown a series of flights in the accident
airplane during the 4days before the accident, indicated that the airplane’s GPWS tested normally
during the preflight checks. He also stated that, within the last year, he had received a valid
in-flight “glideslope” alert while flying low on the glideslope during a visual approach. Other
company pilots who had recently flown the accident airplane reported no problems with the
GPWS during the preflight checks. According to Honeywell, the only common failure that could
prevent activation of the GPWS glideslope and altitude callouts is a radio altimeter failure. No
evidence was found indicating that there were any problems with the radio altimeter.
METEOROLOGICAL INFORMATION
National Weather Service (NWS) surface analysis station models showed, about 0600, a
low pressure area centered over northern Mexico and two frontal boundaries extended through
13 The MFD displays a number for each approach waypoint, which indicates the waypoint’s chronological order
in the waypoint list.
14 Federal regulations required that all turbine engine-powered airplanes with six or more passenger seats be
equipped with an enhanced ground proximity warning system (EGPWS) by March 29, 2005. The EGPWS provides
pilots with a pictorial view of terrain in addition to the aural alerts provided by the GPWS.
NTSB/AAB-06/06

12
central and southern Texas. Station models in southeastern Texas showed that surface winds were
generally less than 5 knots and that mist and light rain existed in the area.
A Terminal Aerodrome Forecast prepared by the NWS for HOU, which was valid at the
time of the accident, stated, in part, the following: Wind at 100° at 5 knots, visibility 1/4sm in
fog, vertical visibility15 100 feet. The NWS issued a dense fog advisory at 0159 local time on
November 22, which was valid at the time of the accident and warned of a large area of fog over
the surrounding area and of visibility of less than 1/4sm.
About 0245 local time, the NWS issued Airman’s Meteorological Information (AIRMET)
“Sierra,” which covered the area surrounding the airplane’s flightpath and was valid at the time of
the accident. AIRMET “Sierra” warned of occasional ceilings below 1,000feet and/or visibility
below 3 sm in precipitation, mist, and/or fog. About 0455 local time, the NWS issued a
convective significant meteorological information (SIGMET),16 which covered the area near the
accident site and was valid at the time of the accident. The SIGMET warned of embedded
thunderstorms moving from 250° at 20knots, with cloud tops above 45,000 feet.
Weather observations at HOU are made by an automated surface observing system
(ASOS), which is located about 4miles northeast of the accident site at an elevation of about
45feet. ASOS transmits official meteorological aerodrome reports (METAR) 53 minutes past
each hour and special weather observations (SPECI) as conditions warrant, including wind shift,
visibility change, and cloud cover or height ceiling change. The 0553 METAR reported that winds
were 110° at 3 knots; the tower visibility was 1/8 sm in fog; the sky condition was clouds
scattered at 100feet, broken at 600 feet, and overcast at 5,500feet; and the surface visibility was
1/2sm. The HOU ASOS issued SPECIs at 0605 and 0627 because the cloud ceiling had changed
from scattered to broken at 100feet and from broken to overcast at 600 feet, respectively. The
HOU ASOS provides unofficial weather observations that are recorded every 5minutes. At 0615,
the HOU ASOS reported that winds were 90° at 3knots, the tower visibility was 1/8 sm in fog,
the sky condition was clouds broken at 100feet and overcast at 600feet, and the surface visibility
was 1/2 sm.
AIRPORT INFORMATION
HOU is located about 8 miles southeast of Houston at an elevation of 46 feet. Runway 4 is
equipped with a medium intensity approach lighting system with runway alignment indicator
lights, high intensity runway edge lights, touchdown lights, and centerline lights. The approach
end of runway 4 at HOU is equipped with a suite of sensors that measure the RVR.
Minimum Safe Altitude Warning Information
Houston TRACON provides approach control services to the HOU ATCT. Houston
TRACON is equipped with an automated radar terminal system IIIA radar data processing unit
15 Vertical visibility is defined as the vertical distance a person can see from the surface of the earth to the
obscuring phenomenon.
16 Convective SIGMETs are issued when severe thunderstorms and embedded thunderstorms occur for more
than 30 minutes of the valid period, regardless of the size of the area; when a line of thunderstorms exists; or when an
area of active thunderstorms affecting at least 3,000 square miles exists.
NTSB/AAB-06/06

13
with an MSAW capability that monitors an aircraft’s separation from terrain and obstacles. The
MSAW warnings are provided at the TRACON and at the HOU ATCT. The MSAW operates in
two modes: general terrain monitor (GTM) mode, which monitors aircraft clearance above the
highest terrain and obstacles in a general area, and the approach monitor (AM) mode, which
monitors aircraft clearance above terrain and obstacles within a specific area on a certain runway
approach (known as the Type II Airport Area). Each of these modes alerts controllers when an
aircraft is currently below or predicted to go below an established minimum safe altitude. If the
minimum safe altitude thresholds are exceeded, the MSAW will provide air traffic controllers
with both a visual alarm (a blinking “LA” [low altitude] on the controller’s screen) and an aural
alert.
A predicted monitor alert will activate if two out of three consecutive radar scans show
that the aircraft will descend 100 feet below the minimum altitude within the next 15 seconds. A
current monitor alert will activate if a single radar scan shows that the aircraft is below the
minimum altitude. The MSAW recorded a single GTM predicted exceedance of the established
minimum safe altitude of 400 feet at 0613:30, but neither of the two subsequent scans predicted
that the airplane would descend below the minimum altitude; therefore, no alert was generated at
this time. The MSAW recorded no AM predicted exceedances; therefore, no AM predicted alerts
were generated. The MSAW generated an AM current alert at 0614:35. The HOU ATCT
controller began issuing a warning to the flight crew about 7.5seconds after the alert activated,
which was about 3 to 4 seconds before impact with the light pole.
The Safety Board evaluated the airplane’s flight profile and the MSAW algorithms for the
HOU airport area to determine whether the MSAW provided the HOU ATCT controller the alerts
expected given the design specifications of the system. The study indicated that the system
performed as designed. The study also indicated that the descent profile of the accident flight was
along the edge of the GTM predicted alert threshold, such that only one GTM predicted alert was
recorded by the system.
During discussions with FAA staff about MSAW-related safety issues, FAA personnel
noted that, in an effort to limit “nuisance alarms,” MSAW parameters are presently set to not
trigger an alarm for aircraft that routinely fly visual approaches lower than any precision
instrument approach. Because the present MSAW design does not provide any way to alter
system performance to treat aircraft flying visual approaches differently from aircraft flying
instrument approaches, aircraft that deviate from instrument approach limits during IMC may not
generate an MSAW alert until they are well below the expected instrument approach altitude.
On July 11, 2006, the Safety Board issued safety recommendations to the FAA that
addressed MSAW alert effectiveness.17 In its recommendation letter, the Board noted that
modifying MSAW software to apply different alerting parameters to aircraft flying visual and
instrument approaches will likely decrease the number of false alarms when aircraft are in visual
approach conditions and increase warning times when aircraft are instrument dependent, which
will increase the credibility and overall effectiveness of MSAW warnings and likely improve
controllers’ ability to detect hazards and potentially prevent accidents.
17 For more information, see the Safety Board’s Web site at
<http://www.ntsb.gov/Recs/letters/2006/A06_44_47.pdf.>
NTSB/AAB-06/06

14
FLIGHT RECORDERS
The accident airplane was equipped with a Fairchild model A-100 CVR. The exterior of
the CVR showed no evidence of structural damage. The CVR was sent to the Safety Board’s
laboratory in Washington, D.C., for readout and evaluation. The interior of the CVR and the tape
sustained no apparent heat or impact damage. The recording started at 0543:32 and continued
uninterrupted until 0614:47. The recording consisted of two channels of “good quality” audio
information, the cockpit area microphone and the combined captain and first officer audio panel
information, and two channels of low level audio that was unusable.
The accident airplane was equipped with an L-3 Communications Fairchild model F1000
flight data recorder (FDR). The FDR used solid-state flash memory as the recording medium and
was configured to record a minimum of 25 hours of flight data. The recorder was found to be in
good condition. The FDR was sent to the Safety Board’s laboratory for readout and evaluation.
About 122 hours of data were recorded on the FDR, including data from the accident flight.
WRECKAGE AND IMPACT INFORMATION
The airplane impacted the top of a light pole about 198 feet above the ground. Pieces of
the right wing inboard leading edge were found embedded in the joint that attaches the light
fixture to the pole. Numerous pieces of the right wing inboard leading edge, upper and lower right
wing skin, and the right main landing gear door were found between the light pole and the initial
ground impact mark, which was about 790 feet northeast of the light pole.
The initial portion of the ground impact mark extended about 110 feet along a magnetic
heading of 035°. Numerous pieces of the left wing outboard leading edge were found embedded
in the ground along the gouge mark. The left wing tip was found near the gouge mark about
50feet from the initial ground impact mark. The airplane’s main wreckage, which contained the
majority of the airplane’s forward fuselage and cockpit, was found beyond the ground impact
mark. All of the airplane structure, including the fuselage, wings, and empennage, were found
along the wreckage path.
Both engines were found separated from the airplane. The engines showed no indications
of uncontainment, case rupture, or in-flight fire. The left engine low pressure compressor blades
were found in place and bent opposite the direction of rotation. The right engine low pressure
compressor blades were found in place and straight, with no circumferential rub marks.
Postaccident disassembly of the engines revealed no preexisting defects or malfunctions, and
testing of both engines’ fuel controls showed that they were functioning normally.
MEDICAL AND PATHOLOGICAL INFORMATION
Tissue and fluid specimens from both pilots tested negative for a wide range of drugs,
including major drugs of abuse. The captain’s specimen tested positive for ethanol, but the
analysis indicated that the detected ethanol most likely resulted from postmortem formation.
NTSB/AAB-06/06

15
TESTS AND RESEARCH
Flight simulations were conducted to determine whether any GPWS alerts would have
been expected during the flight with parameters, such as altitude, airspeed, and glideslope
deviation, set to approximate the conditions of the accident flight profile. The simulations showed
that the airplane penetrated the descent-below-glideslope alert envelope at an altitude of about
925feet, by which time, the ILS frequency had been selected by the first officer and the landing
gear commanded down. The airplane penetrated the insufficient terrain clearance alert envelope at
an altitude of about 255 feet. Therefore, the “glideslope” and “too low terrain” alerts, respectively,
should have activated. The simulations also showed that the “500” and “200” feet aural alerts
should have activated.
Postaccident tests using an engineering bench test unit were also conducted to verify
whether GPWS alerts would be generated with parameters set to approximate the accident flight
profile. The tests showed that, at an altitude about 915 feet, the “glideslope” alert sounded and
repeated. During the tests, the altitude was continually reduced, and the following was noted:
about 500feet, the “500” foot alert sounded; about 300 feet, the “glideslope” alert got louder;
about 272 feet, the “too low terrain” alert sounded and repeated; about 244 feet, the “minimums”
alert sounded; and, about 200feet, the “200” foot alert sounded.
ORGANIZATIONAL AND MANAGEMENT INFORMATION
Business Jet Services is an aviation management company that specializes in management
services for corporate aircraft owners and provides Part 135 on-demand charter services
worldwide. At the time of the accident, the company had about 100employees, including 35
Part 135 pilots, and a fleet of 13 airplanes, 7of which were Gulfstreams.
Instrument Precision Approach and Landing Guidance
According to Business Jet Services’ Gulfstream III Standard Operating Procedures
(SOPs), after the flight crew reviews the descent procedures, the flying pilot is required to brief
the approach, including the airplane configuration (such as the flap setting) and the final approach
fix (FAF) altitude. The SOPs state that as many checklist items as possible should be
accomplished and that the approach checklist must be completed before the initial approach fix.
The CVR recorded the first officer accomplishing the approach briefing; however, the CVR did
not record him mentioning the airplane’s configuration or the FAF altitude, which was 1,500 feet.
The SOPs also indicate that, at initial convergence of the localizer, the flying pilot is
required to call out, “localizer alive,” and, at initial downward needle movement of the glideslope
indicator, to call out, “glideslope alive.” Further, the flying pilot is required to call out, “one dot to
go,” when the airplane is one dot below the glideslope; “localizer captured,” when the
annunciator indicates that the localizer has been captured; and, “glideslope captured,” when the
annunciator indicates that the glideslope has been captured. CVR evidence indicates that the first
officer called out, “localizer alive,” but that he did not call out, “glideslope alive,” or, “one dot to
go.” The CVR transcript indicates that the first officer made the first glideslope-related callout at
0613:14, when he stated, “we’re high on the glideslope.”
NTSB/AAB-06/06

16
The SOPs also state that, no later than the FAF crosscheck, the nonflying pilot should tune
the VHF NAV receivers to a specific frequency and then identify and monitor the frequency.18
The nonflying pilot is also required to call out when the airplane is 1,000,500, 200, and 100 feet
above the DH and when the localizer and glideslope deviate one dot or more. The CVR transcript
indicated that, although the first officer tuned the VHF frequency in the standby position earlier in
the flight, he did not switch the VHF NAV receivers from the HUB VOR frequency to the ILS
frequency until the airplane was at an altitude of about 1,000 feet nor did he identify or monitor
the frequency. Further, the CVR did not record either pilot making any altitude or deviation
callouts.
Business Jet Services’ stabilized approach criteria require that, within 500 feet of the
touchdown elevation, the airplane must be within the approach window, which requires, in part,
that the glideslope and the localizer must not deviate more than one dot and that the descent rate
must be less than 1,000 feet per minute (fpm). If the airplane is not within these criteria, the
nonflying pilot should call out, “missed approach,” and a go-around should be executed.
According to the Safety Board’s airplane performance study, about the time that the airplane was
at an altitude of about 500 feet, the glideslope display would have shown a deviation of more than
one dot and the descent rate would have exceeded 1,000 fpm. The CVR did not record either pilot
call for a missed approach or initiate a go-around.
Maintenance Records
During a review of Business Jet Services maintenance inspection records, Safety Board
investigators noted several discrepancies, including missing inspector signoffs, missing stamps
and dates of maintenance actions, and other missing information. Many of the Form 337s, which
are used to document major repairs and alterations, noted that they were approved by the
Oklahoma City Flight Standards District Office (FSDO); however, no approving documentation
was attached to the forms. In addition, although several records were found indicating compliance
with airworthiness directives (AD), in many of these cases, no records were found pertaining to
work accomplished for compliance with the ADs.
Federal Aviation Administration Surveillance
Business Jet Services was initially certificated on July 24, 1998, by the Dallas FSDO. On
March 15, 2000, the company’s operating certificate was transferred to the Oklahoma City FSDO.
The Business Jet Services principal maintenance inspector (PMI), who was based in Oklahoma
City, had been in that position since 2000. The PMI was also responsible for the surveillance of
three other Part 135 operators, four repair stations, one flight school, and one airplane and
powerplants school.
A review of the FAA’s Program Tracking and Recording Subsystem records indicated that,
from January to November 2004, the PMI visited Business Jet Services 15times and
accomplished all of the required surveillance items, which included a maintenance records review
18 To identify a frequency, the nonflying pilot listens for a specific, audible Morse-code pattern, which is
received by the VHF NAV receivers.
NTSB/AAB-06/06

17
on May 6, 2004. No maintenance procedures or record-keeping discrepancies were noted by the
PMI in the FAA’s records.
Safety Recommendation A-05-08
As a result of the June 13, 2003, Air Sunshine, Inc., flight 527 accident, the Safety Board
issued Safety Recommendation A-05-08, which asked the FAA to do the following:
Review the procedures used during its oversight of Air Sunshine, including those for the
Surveillance and Evaluation Program [SEP] and Regional Aviation Safety Inspection
Program, to determine why the inspections failed to ensure that operational and
maintenance issues that existed at the company were corrected. On the basis of the
findings of this review, modify Part 135 inspection procedures to ensure that such issues,
including maintenance record-keeping and practices, are identified and corrected before
accidents occur.19
In response to the safety recommendation, the FAA indicated that it will review and revise
FAA Order 8300.10, “Airworthiness Inspector’s Handbook,” to enhance inspectors’ awareness of
inadequate record-keeping systems and the timely correction of record-keeping discrepancies.
The FAA noted that because the SEP was designed and used for Part 12l operators, it was not
applicable to Air Sunshine. The FAA stated that FAA Order 1800.56, “National Flight Standards
Work Program Guidelines,” provided guidelines for the establishment of a surveillance work
program. Pending the FAA’s revisions to Order 8300.10, Safety Recommendation A-05-08 was
classified “Open—Acceptable Response,” on January 18, 2006.
ADDITIONAL INFORMATION
FAA Order 7110.65, “Air Traffic Control,” states that approach controllers are required to
issue the current touchdown RVR for the runways in use when the prevailing visibility is 1 mile or
less or when the RVR indicates a reportable value (an RVR that is fewer than 6,000 feet). FAA
Order 7110.65 also states that approach “controllers shall ensure that pilots receive the most
current pertinent weather information. Ask the pilot to confirm receipt of the current ATIS
information if the pilot does not initially state the appropriate ATIS code.” The CVR did not
record the Houston TRACON controller question the first officer when he stated that he had ATIS
information “Kilo” instead of information “Quebec”; notify the flight crew of the current ATIS,
which at that time was information “Romeo”; or provide the flight crew with the current RVR.
19 For more information, see the Board’s Web site at <http://www.ntsb.gov/Recs/letters/2005/A05_08_10.pdf.>
NTSB/AAB-06/06

18
ANALYSIS
General
The flight crew was performing an instrument precision approach; therefore, the presence
of low cloud ceilings and reduced visibility should not have affected the pilots’ ability to fly the
approach.
The Houston TRACON controller did not correct the first officer when he stated that he
had ATIS information “Kilo” instead of “Quebec”; confirm that the flight crew had the most
current weather, ATIS information “Romeo,” and RVR; or question the first officer when he read
back the incorrect runway assignment,20 as required by FAA Order7110.65. However, because
the RVR and weather conditions had not changed considerably since the time the first officer
received the information and the CVR recorded the flight crew correctly reference the runway
later in the approach, the controller’s errors did not contribute to the accident.
Postaccident benchtests set to parameters approximating the accident flight profile
showed that the “glideslope,” “500” foot, “too low terrain,” “minimums,” “300”foot, and “200”
foot GPWS alerts should have activated on the accident flight. However, the CVR did not record
the accident GPWS generate any alerts during the flight. The only common failure that could
prevent activation of the GPWS glideslope and altitude callouts is a radio altimeter failure.
However, a review of Business Jet Services’ maintenance records and the CVR transcript found
no evidence indicating any problems with the radio altimeter. The GPWS unit and the radio
altimeter were destroyed during impact; therefore, the Safety Board was unable to determine why
the GPWS did not operate as expected. Federal regulations would have required that the accident
airplane be equipped with an EGPWS by March 29, 2005. The EGPWS provides pilots with a
pictorial view of terrain in addition to aural alerts.
A review of the FAA’s Program Tracking and Reporting System records indicated that the
PMI reviewed company maintenance records, which is a required inspection item, on May 6,
2004, and no discrepancies were noted. However, a Safety Board review of the company’s
maintenance records revealed that some of the maintenance paperwork was inconsistent,
incomplete, and/or not documented properly. The Board is concerned that, although the FAA
PMI’s oversight of Business Jet Services was in accordance with standard guidelines, the PMI did
not detect the maintenance records deficiencies found during the investigation. As noted
previously, the Safety Board addressed this issue by issuing Safety Recommendation A-05-08,
which is currently classified “Open—Acceptable Response,” pending the FAA’s revisions to
Order 8300.10.
Accident Sequence
The examination of CVR and FDR data indicated that the en route portion of the accident
flight from DAL to HOU was routine. The first officer started the approach briefing about
0547:50. However, Business Jet Services’ SOPs state that the flying pilot—in this case, the
20 At 0559:06, the CVR recorded the first officer read back “runway one four” instead of “runway four.”
NTSB/AAB-06/06

19
captain—should brief the approach. Further, during the briefing, the first officer did not mention
all of the approach checklist items, including the FAF altitude.
About 3 minutes after starting the approach briefing, the CVR recorded the captain asking
the first officer to set the navigational approach waypoints in the FMS. The pilots then discussed
deleting the HUB VOR waypoint from the list, which the first officer most likely did at that time.
The MFD only displays a chronological number for each approach waypoint; therefore, it is
possible that the flight crew forgot that the first officer removed the HUB waypoint from the
FMS, causing them to mistakenly believe that the last waypoint displayed on the MFD (EISEN)
was the airport. Regardless, an FMS serves as a secondary navigational aid on an ILS approach.
The pilots should have been relying on the primary navigational aids during the approach.
About 0612, the CVR recorded both pilots stating that they were unable to get the APR
mode on their flight directors to activate. About 1 minute later, the first officer told the captain
that they were “high on” the glideslope and then that they were “on” the glideslope. According to
the airplane performance study, the airplane was actually about 700 feet below the glideslope
when the first officer made these statements, and the airplane remained well below the glideslope
throughout the rest of the approach. Although the first officer entered the ILS frequency in the
standby position in both VHF NAV receivers earlier in the approach (about 0559, after the
approach clearance), at this point in the approach, neither pilot had selected the ILS frequency.
Further, the glideslope indicator would not have been visible on the EADI. Therefore, the first
officer could not have been looking at the glideslope indicator when he made the statements about
the glideslope.
The first officer’s failure to activate and identify the ILS frequency earlier in the approach
prevented the flight crew from recognizing that the airplane was off course and below the
glideslope. The fast/slow indicator on the EADI resembles the glideslope indicator and is visible
on the EADI at all times, whereas the glideslope indicator only appears on the screen once an ILS
frequency has been activated. Postaccident flight simulations revealed that the fast/slow indicator
would have been centered within one dot during the approach sequence and that the indications
would have been consistent with the first officer’s comments about the glideslope if he had
mistaken the fast/slow indicator for the glideslope indicator.
The first officer did not switch the VOR frequency to the ILS frequency until about
1minute before impact. When the first officer realized that he had not switched to the ILS
frequency, he should have called for a missed approach because the airplane was not properly
configured for the approach and was not receiving proper vertical guidance during the most
critical phase of the flight. Once the first officer selected the ILS frequency, the glideslope
indicator would have appeared on the screen and both pilots’ displays would have shown a
full-scale deviation below the glideslope and a full-scale or near full-scale deviation of the
localizer; however, the CVR did not record either pilot mention the glideslope deviation. The
fast/slow indicator would have remained visible on the EADI even after the ILS frequency was
selected, which may explain why the pilots did not immediately notice the glideslope indicator
deviation after the first officer selected the ILS frequency. Therefore, the pilots most likely
mistook the fast/slow indicator for the glideslope indicator throughout the approach sequence.
NTSB/AAB-06/06

20
The Safety Board is concerned that the first officer switched the frequency of a primary
navigational aid and failed to inform the captain. If the pilot-not-flying takes such actions without
first checking with or simultaneously informing the flying pilot, confusion can occur, as
evidenced by the captain’s remark, “What happened? Did you change my frequency?” In this
case, because the airplane was at such a low altitude (about 1,000 feet) in IMC, such a major
change should have prompted the captain to immediately initiate a missed approach.
Shortly after activating the ILS frequency, the first officer stated, “we’re all squared away
now.” The captain replied, “I don’t know if I can get back on it [the ILS localizer] in time.” The
first officer stated, “yeah you will. you’re squared away now.” These comments indicate that the
pilots were focused on correcting the localizer deviation. The first officer dismissed the captain’s
concerns, and the captain did not proceed to assert his authority. As noted, earlier in the approach,
the flight crew had attempted unsuccessfully to activate the flight director APR mode, and no
evidence indicates that either pilot tried to reactivate the APR mode on their flight directors once
the ILS frequency was selected. Therefore, the flight crew continued to perform the approach
without the advantage of flight director guidance. The CVR did not record the pilots making any
of the required altitude callouts, except at 0614:40, when the first officer announced that they had
reached the DH of 244feet. The airplane hit the light pole immediately thereafter.
FDR data show that the airplane exceeded a descent rate of 1,000 fpm within 500feet of
the touchdown elevation, which was outside of the stabilized approach window. In addition,
although the localizer deviation was less than one dot by the time the airplane reached 500 feet,
the localizer would have shown a full-scale or near full-scale deviation of the localizer when the
first officer initially activated the ILS frequency. Both of these factors should also have prompted
the flight crew to initiate a missed approach.
Throughout the approach, the flight crew failed to follow approved company approach
procedures. The first officer’s failure to activate and identify the ILS frequency at the appropriate
point in the approach prevented the pilots from receiving glideslope and localizer information on
their EADIs until late in the approach. Further, the pilots’ failure to engage the APR mode on their
flight directors after the ILS frequency was selected prevented them from receiving flight director
guidance. In addition, neither pilot was adequately scanning the cockpit instruments. Compliance
with standard company procedures, activating and identifying the ILS frequency and
subsequently the APR mode, and adequate monitoring of the flight instruments would likely have
prevented the accident.
Fatigue might have also played a role in the flight crew’s degraded situational awareness.
According to the captain’s wife, on the night before the accident, the captain received about
4hours less sleep than normal. A company employee stated that, when the captain arrived for
work on the morning of the accident, he looked as though he had just woken up. The first officer’s
wife stated that the first officer did not have regular sleeping hours and that she was not sure how
much sleep he got the night before the accident. Although the early reporting time for the accident
flight might have resulted in flight crew fatigue, the actual amount and quality of sleep received
by the captain and the first officer could not be determined. Regardless, their improper conduct of
the approach reflected fundamental operational shortcomings that were independent of fatigue.
NTSB/AAB-06/06

21
Minimum Safe Altitude Warning Operation
The Safety Board evaluated the airplane’s flight profile and the MSAW algorithms for the
HOU airport area and determined that the MSAW performed as designed given the alert
thresholds established for the HOU airport area. The study determined that the accident descent
profile was along the edge of the MSAW GTM predicted alert threshold. In this case, although the
MSAW recorded a single predicted exceedance of the threshold at 0614:30, the two subsequent
scans did not predict exceedances; therefore, no GTM predicted alert was generated.
The MSAW generated an AM current alert at 0614:35. The HOU ATCT controller began
issuing a low-altitude warning to the flight crew about 7.5seconds later. Analysis of the MSAW’s
performance found that the system provided only about 11.5 seconds of warning time before the
airplane struck the light pole, which was not sufficient time for the controller to recognize the
alert and warn the flight crew in time to prevent the accident. Configuring a single set of MSAW
parameters is a balancing act between minimizing “nuisance alarms” and providing sufficient
warning time. Implementing software and adaptation modifications to minimize or eliminate
unwarranted MSAW alerts without degrading the usefulness and safety benefit of MSAW will
increase the credibility and overall effectiveness of MSAW warnings. Such modifications will
likely improve controllers’ ability to detect hazards and potentially prevent controlled flight into
terrain accidents. As noted previously, in July 2006, the Safety Board issued safety
recommendations to the FAA that addressed MSAW alert effectiveness.
