A L
T RAN SPO
R National Transportation Safety Board
N T
O E PLURIBUS UNUM A
I T Washington, D.C. 20594
A T IO
N N
SAFETYBO
AR
D
Aircraft Accident Brief
Accident Number: DCA07MA003
Operator: Private Owner
Aircraft and Registration: Cirrus SR20, N929CD
Location: Manhattan, New York City
Date: October 11, 2006
Adopted On: May 1, 2007
HISTORY OF FLIGHT
On October 11, 2006, about 1442 eastern daylight time,1 a Cirrus Design SR20,
N929CD, operated as a personal flight, crashed into an apartment building in Manhattan, New
York City, while attempting to maneuver above the East River. The two pilots on board the
airplane, a certificated private pilot who was the owner of the airplane and a passenger who was
a certificated commercial pilot with a flight instructor certificate, were killed. One person on the
ground sustained serious injuries, two people on the ground sustained minor injuries, and the
airplane was destroyed by impact forces and postcrash fire. The flight was operating under the
provisions of 14 Code of Federal Regulations (CFR) Part 91, and no flight plan was filed.
Marginal visual flight rules (MVFR) conditions2 prevailed at the time of the accident.
The accident airplane departed Teterboro Airport (TEB), Teterboro, New Jersey
(see point A in figure 1, which shows the accident flight track), about 1429 and was cleared for a
visual flight rules (VFR) departure. According to air traffic control (ATC) transcripts, the pilots
acknowledged that they were to stay out of the New York class B airspace.3 After takeoff, the
accident airplane turned southeast and climbed to an altitude of about 600 to 800 feet.4 When
the flight reached the western shore of the Hudson River (see point B in figure 1), it turned to the
south, remaining over the river, then descended to 500 feet.5 The flight continued southbound
1 Unless otherwise noted, all times in this brief are eastern daylight time based on a 24-hour clock.
2 MVFR conditions are those in which a cloud ceiling or lowest layer of clouds is reported as broken or overcast
and between 1,000 and 3,000 feet above ground level and/or visibility is from 3 to 5 miles. In class B airspace,
visual flight rules conditions should be free of clouds with a minimum visibility of 3 miles.
3 Paragraph 3-2-3 of the Aeronautical Information Manual defines class B airspace as follows, “Generally, that
airspace from the surface to 10,000 feet MSL [mean sea level] surrounding the nation’s busiest airports in terms of
IFR [instrument flight rules] operations or passenger enplanements. The configuration of each Class-B airspace area
is individually tailored and consists of a surface area and two or more layers … and is designed to contain all
published instrument procedures once an aircraft enters the airspace. An ATC [air traffic control] clearance is
required for all aircraft to operate in the area, and all aircraft that are so cleared receive separation services within
the airspace. The cloud clearance requirement for VFR operations is ‘clear of clouds.’”
4 Unless otherwise indicated, all altitudes referenced in this report are reported as height above mean sea level.
5 The floor of the New York class B airspace transitioned from 1,800 to 1,500 feet in this area, which is known
as the Hudson River exclusion. Regarding minimum safe altitudes, 14 CFR 91.119 states that “except when
necessary for takeoff or landing, no person may operate an aircraft below the following altitudes: (a) Anywhere. An

2
over the Hudson River until abeam of the southern tip of Manhattan (see point C in figure 1), at
which point, the flight turned southwest bound.6 Radar data from John F. Kennedy International
Airport (JFK), Jamaica, New York; Newark International Airport (EWR), Newark, New Jersey;
and Westchester County Airport (HPN), White Plains, New York, indicated that the accident
airplane’s altitude varied from 500 to 700 feet for the remainder of the flight.
Figure 1. Accident flight track for N929CD.
About 1436, the airplane flew around the Statue of Liberty (see point D in figure 1) then
headed to the northeast, at which point, it proceeded to fly over the East River (see point E in
altitude allowing, if a power unit fails, an emergency landing without undue hazard to persons or property on the
surface. … (c) Over other than congested areas. An altitude of 500 feet above the surface, except over open water or
sparsely populated areas. In those cases, the aircraft may not be operated closer than 500 feet to any person, vessel,
vehicle or structure.”
6 The floor of the New York class B airspace in this area transitioned from 1,500 to 1,100 feet.
NTSB/AAB-07/02

3
figure 1).7 About 1 mile north of the Queensboro Bridge, the airplane made a left turn to reverse
its course. Radar contact was lost about 1442. The airplane impacted a 520-foot tall apartment
building at 524 East 72nd Street, 333 feet above street level (see figure 2).
Figure 2. Photograph of apartment building that N929CD impacted.
PERSONNEL INFORMATION
Pilot/Owner
The pilot/owner, age 34, held a private pilot certificate with a rating for airplane
single-engine land, issued February 9, 2006. His most recent Federal Aviation Administration
(FAA) third-class medical certificate was issued on November 18, 2005, with no waivers or
limitations. A review of his FAA airman file and medical records did not reveal any discrepancies
or enforcement actions or preexisting medical conditions. He purchased the accident airplane on
June 9, 2006.
According to the pilot/owner’s logbook at the time of the accident, he had accumulated
87.8 hours total flight time, all of which were accumulated in the last 12 months, including
12.5 hours in Cirrus aircraft, 3.9 hours of which were as pilot-in-command (PIC). In the last
7 The floor of the New York class B airspace in this area transitioned from 1,100 to 1,500 feet. The floor of the
New York class B airspace transitioned from 1,500 to 1,100 feet as N929CD passed the Williamsburg Bridge on the
East River; this area is known as the East River exclusion.
NTSB/AAB-07/02

4
90 days, 30 days, and 24 hours before the accident flight, he flew 13.7, 0, and 0 hours,
respectively.
The pilot/owner’s logbook indicated that he received three instructional flights in a Cirrus
SR228 between July 11 and 13, 2006. His first flight in the accident airplane was on July 20,
2006, and there was a flight instructor with him on that flight. He flew the airplane again on
July 24, 2006, without an instructor. The pilot/owner had flown with six different flight
instructors since receiving his private pilot’s certificate and had received a total of 11.5 hours of
flight instruction in Cirrus aircraft. Most of his flight time was conducted in California, and there
was no record that he had previously flown in the New York East River class B exclusion
airspace.
A previous flight instructor described the pilot/owner as being “quick to adapt,
conscientious, and checklist-oriented,” and another instructor stated that his flying skills were
average, or as expected, for a pilot of his experience. The instructor who flew with the
pilot/owner in the Cirrus SR22 stated that he was “one of the better pilots” he had flown with and
that he flew “extremely well” for a pilot with his experience. According to his logbook, this
instructor also provided him with 3.5 hours of ground instruction on Cirrus airplane systems,
including the multifunctional display, the Garmin 430 avionics, and a “high performance
briefing.”
Pilot-Rated Passenger
The pilot-rated passenger, age 26, held a commercial pilot’s certificate, issued August 25,
2003, with ratings for airplane single-engine land, airplane multi-engine land, and instrument
airplane. He also held a flight instructor certificate, with ratings for airplane single-engine land
and instrument airplane (issued on September 23, 2003). The pilot-rated passenger’s most recent
FAA second-class medical certificate was issued on June 15, 2004, with no waivers or
limitations. A review of the pilot-rated passenger’s FAA airman file and medical records did not
reveal any discrepancies or enforcement actions or preexisting medical conditions. In addition,
the pilot-rated passenger held a ground instructor certificate and an airframe and powerplant
certificate.
The pilot-rated passenger conducted most of his flights in California where he owned and
operated a fixed-based operation that provided flight training, aircraft rental, and sightseeing
flights to the general aviation community, as well as maintenance on all their aircraft. The
pilot-rated passenger had not received the Cirrus Standardization Instructor Program offered by
the airplane manufacturer. However, there is no FAA requirement to complete this program
before providing instruction in a Cirrus aircraft. It could not be determined if he was acting as an
instructor during the flight.
The pilot-rated passenger’s logbook documented his flight experience from
September 11, 1998, to February 9, 2004. There were no personal flight records from
February 10, 2004, to November 2, 2005. The pilot-rated passenger kept an electronic
spreadsheet for his flight record from November 3, 2005, to October 1, 2006. According to the
8 The SR22 is the next-generation model of the SR20, with more speed and performance.
NTSB/AAB-07/02

5
logbook and electronic spreadsheet, the pilot-rated passenger had accumulated 861 total flight
hours, 759.3 hours of which were as PIC. In the last 90 days, 30 days, and 24 hours before the
accident flight, he flew 81, 35, and 0 hours, respectively. There was no record that he had
previously flown in the East River class B exclusion airspace or had piloted a Cirrus aircraft.
Recent Activities
According to family and friends, both the pilot/owner and the pilot-rated passenger and
their respective families were touring New York City during the days preceding the accident.
The night before the accident, both families dined at a local restaurant and attended a musical.
Both families retired to a New York City hotel for the evening. The morning of the accident, the
pilot/owner and pilot-rated passenger assisted their families for their departure to California, via
a commercial airline flight. According to the families, the pilot/owner and pilot-rated passenger
planned to fly the accident airplane from New Jersey to California in the coming days. About
1022, the pilot/owner telephoned the fixed base operator (FBO) at TEB to inform them that he
would arrive about 1230 to fly his airplane. The pilot/owner and pilot-rated passenger arrived at
TEB about 1230, and both were observed obtaining weather data and planning a flight. The
pilot/owner and pilot-rated passenger indicated to friends that the intent of the flight was to circle
the Statue of Liberty. Personnel at the FBO observed the pilot/owner performing a preflight
inspection of the accident airplane before departure.
AIRPLANE INFORMATION
The Cirrus SR20 is a single-engine, single-pilot, low-wing airplane with four seats, fixed
tricycle landing gear, and dual-side yoke controls. The accident airplane, serial number 1230,
was manufactured in 2002. It was equipped with a 200-horsepower Teledyne Continental Motor
IO-360-E(6)B six-cylinder, air-cooled, fuel-injected, horizontally opposed reciprocating engine.
The three-blade, constant speed propeller was a Hartzell Model PHC-J3YF-1RF. The accident
airplane was equipped with a Cirrus Airplane Parachute System designed to recover the airplane
from catastrophic emergencies in which normal emergency procedures are ineffective. The
airplane was also equipped with an electro-pneumatic stall warning system to provide audible
warning of an approach to aerodynamic stall.
National Transportation Safety Board investigators reviewed the airplane’s maintenance
records and found that all service bulletins and airworthiness directives had been complied with.
AIR TRAFFIC CONTROL
This accident occurred in a complex section of airspace surrounding Manhattan Island,
near three major air carrier airports and a variety of other general aviation facilities
accommodating both fixed-wing and rotary-wing aircraft. Because of the high density of air
traffic in this area, the FAA has designated most of the airspace “class B,” the second most
restrictive designation for airspace in the United States.
VFR operations are authorized below the class B airspace surrounding Manhattan Island
in designated zones called the Hudson River and East River exclusion areas (the shaded area in
figure 3 outlines the East River exclusion area, where the accident occurred). These exclusion
areas were first defined in 1971. The FAA stated that the purpose of the Hudson and East River
NTSB/AAB-07/02

6
exclusion areas was to provide for VFR aircraft operations over the rivers for transiting, landing,
or departing aircraft. Before the exclusion areas were defined, the floor of the class B airspace
was typically at the surface of the rivers in the current areas of exclusion, and any aircraft
operations over the rivers in these areas had to be coordinated with ATC. Seaplane and
helicopter bases are currently located in or near these exclusion areas, and aircraft also use the
Hudson River exclusion area to transit under the class B airspace.
Figure 3. Map depicting New York East River class B exclusion.
The last communication between ATC and the accident flight was about 1433 when the
accident pilots acknowledged that they were to squawk VFR.9 No further ATC communication
was required while the flight was conducted in the Hudson and East River class B exclusion
areas. Pilots are advised to announce their position and intentions on common traffic advisory
frequency (CTAF) 123.05 Mhz when operating in the Hudson River exclusion area and CTAF
123.075 Mhz when operating in the East River exclusion area, but the announcements are not
9 Squawk VFR meant that the accident pilots were to change their transponder beacon code from 0312 to 1200,
which is the designated code for all VFR aircraft.
NTSB/AAB-07/02

7
mandatory. There were no reports of the accident flight communicating on either of these
frequencies. Pilots are also responsible for maintaining their own traffic separation.
METEOROLOGICAL INFORMATION
The New York Central Park Automated Surface Observing System reported at the time of
the accident that winds were from 060º at 6 knots, visibility was at 7 statute miles, the ceiling
was overcast at 1,800 feet above ground level (agl), the temperature was 17º Celsius (C), the
dewpoint was 13º C, and the altimeter was 29.90 inches of mercury. No visibility restrictions
were reported at any of the surrounding airport weather stations. An aircraft that was landing at
Newark Liberty International Airport at the time of the accident was equipped with a weather
reporting capability that indicated that the winds at 700 feet were from 095º at 13 knots.
FLIGHT RECORDERS
The airplane was not equipped with a cockpit voice recorder or a flight data recorder and
was not required by Federal regulations to be so equipped.
WRECKAGE AND IMPACT INFORMATION
The airplane impacted the 32nd and the 33rd floors of the north face of an apartment
building located at 524 East 72nd Street. The engine, propeller, the right portion of the engine
mount, and the nose landing gear strut were found in an apartment on the 32nd floor. The engine
was found inverted with the propeller separated. The engine and propeller exhibited thermal
damage and were coated with ash, debris, and fire-extinguishing agent.
The majority of the wreckage was on the street level at East 72nd Street, directly below
the impact point. The wreckage was destroyed by impact forces and postcrash fire. Some
wreckage debris was found on adjacent rooftops, balconies, and building projections. The
examination of the wreckage indicated that there was no sign of an in-flight fire or any
preexisting damage to the airplane.
MEDICAL AND PATHOLOGICAL INFORMATION
The Office of the Chief Medical Examiner, New York City, New York, performed an
autopsy on both pilots. The City Medical Examiners determined that the cause of death for the
pilots was “multiple blunt trauma.”
The Civil Aerospace Medical Institute, Oklahoma City, Oklahoma, conducted a
toxicological examination on tissue specimens from both pilots. The specimens tested negative
for alcohol and other performance-impairing drugs.
TESTS AND RESEARCH
Engine and Propeller Examination
The engine was sent to the Teledyne Continental Motors facility in Mobile, Alabama, for
teardown and examination directed by Safety Board investigators. The propeller was torn down
NTSB/AAB-07/02

8
and examined at the Hartzell Propeller facility in Piqua, Ohio. The teardowns revealed no
evidence of pre-impact failure. All damage could be attributed either to impact forces or the
postcrash fire. Approximately 50 percent of the No. 1 blade and about 25 percent of the No. 3
blade were missing due to thermal damage. The No. 2 blade exhibited no signs of thermal
damage and was intact. The No. 2 propeller blade and the No. 1 and 2 blade stubs showed
leading edge damage and a large-radius forward bend. The propeller flange had separated in the
radius immediately aft of the flange, and the appearance and location of the fracture were typical
of torsional overload failure. These findings indicated that the powerplant was operating properly
and did not contribute to the accident and that the propeller was being driven by the engine upon
impact.
Components Examination
The airplane contained a multifunctional display that housed a memory chip for storing
data. The memory chip was located within the wreckage and sent to the Safety Board’s vehicle
recorder laboratory for examination. However, due to impact damage, no data could be
extracted. Two hand-held Garmin global positioning system (GPS) units (GPSMAP 396 and
GPSMAP 496) were found in the wreckage. Both units were examined; however, no data could
be extracted due to impact forces with the building and then the street and postcrash water
damage.
Aircraft Performance
The accident airplane’s constant-altitude turn performance was determined using
recorded radar data, airplane performance data,10 recorded winds at 700 feet, and standard
aerodynamic calculations. Radar data indicated that the airplane was flying north over the East
River at about 97 knots and initiated a left turn over Roosevelt Island (see figure 4 for position
location). Roosevelt Island divides the East River into west and east channels. Although the East
River is about 2,100 feet wide at the turn location, the effective turn width available was reduced
to about 1,400 feet because the airplane was flying near the middle of the East Channel at the
start of the turn and the 13-knot easterly wind caused a measurable westward drift.11
10 Airplane performance data were based on the Cirrus Pilot Operating Handbook, an estimated operating
weight of 3,000 pounds, and a flaps-up stall speed of 67 knots.
11 The calculated westward drift is about 300 feet based on a turn diameter of 1,750 feet and about 400 feet
based on a turn diameter of 2,100 feet. For more information, see Aircraft Performance Study, dated November 16,
2006, in the docket for this accident.
NTSB/AAB-07/02

9
Figure 4. Radar tracks of the accident flight over the East River.
A 1,400-foot diameter constant-altitude turn at 97 knots would have required a minimum
bank angle of 50º12 and a load factor of 1.55 Gs. At this airspeed, the airplane could produce a
load factor of 2.1 Gs at a bank angle of 61º before reaching wing aerodynamic stall. If the initial
portion of the turn were less aggressive than a constant bank angle of 50º, a sufficiently greater
bank angle would have been required as the turn progressed, which would have placed the
airplane dangerously close to an aerodynamic stall at relatively low altitude.
WITNESS OBSERVATIONS
There were predominantly five eyewitnesses to the accident. One eyewitness stated that
the airplane entered a steep turn left toward the south, which continued until it struck a building.
Another reported that she saw the airplane in a left turn toward the south. The airplane continued
in the turn until it crashed into a building. Two witnesses reported that the airplane entered a left
turn and was pulling up at the time it impacted the building. A fifth witness stated that as the
airplane was heading straight toward the building, the wings were “wobbling,” like the pilot was
fighting for control. The airplane then pitched down and to the right and descended below his
field of view prior to impact.
12 The practical test standards for private pilots require a demonstration of steep turns to a maximum bank angle
of 45º. During the test, the pilot has to maintain the entry altitude, ±100 feet; airspeed, ±10 knots; bank, ±5°; and
rolls out on the entry heading, ±10°
NTSB/AAB-07/02

10
ADDITIONAL INFORMATION
Federal Aviation Administration Action
Since the accident, the FAA issued Notice to Airmen (NOTAM) 6/3495 temporarily
prohibiting fixed-wing aircraft, such as the accident airplane, from operating in the East River
class B exclusion area where the accident occurred unless authorized and controlled by ATC.
The East River class B exclusion is in effect, but its use is limited to helicopters and seaplanes
that are taking off and landing at nearby sea bases. This prohibition is intended to prevent
airplane pilots from encountering a situation in which they must attempt a 180º turn or other
abrupt maneuver to avoid penetrating controlled airspace and states the following:
Effective immediately until further notice, VFR flight operations involving fixed
wing aircraft (excluding amphibious fixed wing aircraft landing or departing New
York Skyports Inc. Seaplane Base) in the East River class B exclusion area
extending from the southwestern tip of Governors Island to the north tip of
Roosevelt Island, are prohibited unless authorized and being controlled by ATC.
The NOTAM is in effect until further notice; however, the charts for the area would not
be changed until rulemaking action is completed. The FAA indicated in a meeting held in
December 2006 between the FAA and Safety Board staff that it was planning rulemaking to
make the prohibition contained in the NOTAM permanent. The Safety Board issued Safety
Recommendation A-07-38 asking the FAA to make this prohibition permanent.
U.S. Coast Guard Video
A video from a U.S. Coast Guard vessel’s surveillance system was received. The camera
that recorded the video was positioned at an angle that had a direct view of the last segment of
the accident flight. The quality of the video was poor in that the airplane cannot be readily seen.
The explosion after impact was the only accident-related event that was captured on the video.
NTSB/AAB-07/02

11
ANALYSIS
There were no system, structural, or engine malfunctions found. The engine was
producing power as indicated by the separation of the propeller hub, damage to the blade hubs,
and damage to the No. 2 blade. The pilot/owner was properly certificated to fly the accident
airplane. The pilot-rated passenger was also a certified flight instructor and qualified to have
flown the accident flight.
The Safety Board medical officer reviewed the autopsy results, and the extremity injuries
noted for the pilot-rated passenger, who was seated in the aircraft right seat, were potentially
consistent with his use of the controls at the time of a substantial impact; however, these injuries
are not entirely typical of injuries from such a source, and the complex accident forces may have
resulted in such injuries from other sources. No injuries were noted for the pilot/owner, who was
seated in the aircraft left seat, that are potentially consistent with his use of the controls at the
time of a substantial impact, but the postaccident fire would likely have eliminated much of the
evidence of such injuries. On the basis of the injuries noted, the most that can be reasonably
concluded is that the observed injuries do not eliminate the possibility that the pilot-rated
passenger was on the controls at the time of the accident. Due to the complex accident forces
involved in the crash sequence, it is not possible to determine who was the pilot in control of the
accident flight, if flight instruction was being given, or who was manipulating the controls during
the flight or at the time of the accident. Although the pilot/owner had only 88 hours in single-
engine airplanes, he had the basic airmanship knowledge and skill required to perform the
preflight planning for and to conduct the accident flight.
As the accident flight proceeded north along the East River, it approached the northern
end of the East River exclusion where the floor of the class B airspace transitioned from
1,100 feet to the surface, effectively requiring either a 180° turn to reverse course or an ATC
clearance to enter the class B airspace. A constant-altitude 180º turn with an easterly wind of
13 knots and at the calculated airspeed of 97 knots was possible from the position that the
accident flight began the turn, as long as a bank angle of at least 50º but no greater than 61º was
maintained for the duration of the turn. If the bank angle exceeded 61º, the airplane wing would
aerodynamically stall.
Radar data indicate that the accident airplane was at an altitude of 600 feet before the
180º turn was initiated and that the actual turn was accomplished with a bank angle of 40º to 45º,
based on ground speed and turn radius. The airplane was only about 75 percent through the 180º
turn when it approached the western shoreline of the East River. According to radar data, this is
the approximate location where the airplane began to descend. Witnesses who saw the accident
airplane in flight described the motion of the airplane as “wobbling” from side to side and
reported that it was in a pitch-down attitude and at a steep bank angle at this time. Because the
turn was initiated at 40º to 45º rather than the minimally required 50º, the pilots increased the
bank angle of the airplane to attempt completion of the 180º turn. On the basis of the witness
accounts and the loss of altitude indicated by radar data, it is likely that the pilots put the airplane
into an aerodynamic stall while pulling through the turn.
The pilots did not aggressively bank the airplane throughout the turn nor did they use the
full available width of the river. Radar data indicate that the airplane was in the middle of the
NTSB/AAB-07/02

12
East Channel at the start of the 180º turn (see figure 5) as opposed to beginning the turn from the
eastern shoreline. Although it cannot be determined whether the pilots were aware of the wind’s
effect on the execution of the 180º turn, they should have been able to observe the difference in
the ground track and heading during the flight to determine that there was a wind from the east
and compensate for westward drift. Alternatively, the pilots could have dramatically improved
the turning performance by transitioning to the west side of the East River, taking advantage of
the full width of the river, and making a right turn into the easterly wind. By starting the turn on
the west side of the river and turning into the wind, a minimum bank angle of 35° would have
been needed, rather than the minimum 50° required by turning in the direction of the wind.
Figure 5. Photo illustration depicting the available width for the turn maneuver and the
approximate location of N929CD at the beginning of the turn maneuver.
The pilots may have been concerned about the consequences of inadvertently penetrating
the class B airspace or flying over Manhattan Island. However, in a situation such as this, pilots
should place a higher priority on maintaining aircraft control. According to radar data and
weather reports, no other aircraft were in the area at the time of the accident, and the cloud level
was reported to be at 1,800 feet. Although the lower limit of the class B airspace was 1,100 feet,
the pilots could have climbed as necessary to avoid buildings in the area.
The pilots should have recognized, during preflight planning or while they were
considering flying up the East River after they were already in flight, that there was limited
turning space in the East River exclusion area and that they would need to maximize the lateral
distance available for turning. Alternatively, the pilots could have chosen to contact ATC and
request clearance to transit through the class B airspace instead of turning around in the East
River exclusion area. According to FAA ATC, such clearances are relatively common.
NTSB/AAB-07/02

13
