Runway Overrun
American Airlines Flight 2253
Boeing 757-200, N668AA
Jackson Hole, Wyoming
December 29, 2010
Incident Report
NTSB/AAR-12/01
PB2012-910401
National
Transportation
Safety Board

NTSB/AAR-12/01
PB2012-910401
Notation 8416
Adopted June 18, 2012
Aircraft Incident Report
Runway Overrun
American Airlines Flight 2253
Boeing 757-200, N668AA
Jackson Hole, Wyoming
December 29, 2010
National
Transportation
Safety Board
490 L’Enfant Plaza, S.W.
Washington, D.C. 20594

National Transportation Safety Board. 2012. Runway Overrun, American Airlines Flight 2253,
Boeing 757-200, N668AA, Jackson Hole, Wyoming, December 29, 2010. Aircraft Incident Report
NTSB/AAR-12/01. Washington, DC.
Abstract: This report discusses the December 29, 2010, incident involving American Airlines
flight 2253, a Boeing 757-200, N668AA, which ran off the departure end of runway 19 and came
to a stop in deep snow after landing at Jackson Hole Airport, Jackson Hole, Wyoming. The
occupants were not injured, and the airplane sustained minor damage.
Safety issues identified in this incident include the following: inadequate pilot training for
recognition of a situation in which the speedbrakes do not automatically deploy as expected after
landing, lack of an alert to warn pilots when speedbrakes have not automatically deployed during
the landing roll, lack of guidance for pilots of certain Boeing airplanes to follow when an
unintended thrust reverser lockout occurs, lack of pilot training for multiple emergency and
abnormal situations, and lack of pilot training emphasizing monitoring skills and workload
management. As a result of this investigation, three new safety recommendations are issued and
three existing safety recommendations are reiterated to the Federal Aviation Administration.
The National Transportation Safety Board is an independent Federal agency dedicated to promoting aviation,
railroad, highway, marine, pipeline, and hazardous materials safety. Established in 1967, the agency is mandated by
Congress through the Independent Safety Board Act of 1974 to investigate transportation accidents, determine the
probable causes of the accidents, issue safety recommendations, study transportation safety issues, and evaluate the
safety effectiveness of government agencies involved in transportation. The Safety Board makes public its actions
and decisions through accident reports, safety studies, special investigation reports, safety recommendations, and
statistical reviews.
Recent publications are available in their entirety on the Internet at <http://www.ntsb.gov>. Other information about
available publications also may be obtained from the website or by contacting:
National Transportation Safety Board
Records Management Division, CIO-40
490 L’Enfant Plaza, SW
Washington, DC 20594
(800) 877-6799 or (202) 314-6551
Safety Board publications may be purchased, by individual copy or by subscription, from the National Technical
Information Service. To purchase this publication, order report number PB2012-910401 from:
National Technical Information Service
5285 Port Royal Road
Springfield, Virginia 22161
(800) 553-6847 or (703) 605-6000
The Independent Safety Board Act, as codified at 49 U.S.C. Section 1154(b), precludes the admission into evidence
or use of Board reports related to an incident or accident in a civil action for damages resulting from a matter
mentioned in the report.

NTSB Aircraft Incident Report
Contents
Figures ............................................................................................................................................ ii
Abbreviations and Acronyms ..................................................................................................... iii
Executive Summary ..................................................................................................................... iv
1. The Incident ................................................................................................................................1
2. Investigation and Analysis ........................................................................................................5
2.1 Pilot Performance/Operational Issues ........................................................................................5
2.1.1 Pilot Actions in Preparation for Landing at Jackson Hole Airport ..................................5
2.1.2 Pilot Actions During the Landing at Jackson Hole Airport .............................................6
2.2 Airplane Systems .......................................................................................................................9
2.2.1 Air/Ground Sensing System ............................................................................................9
2.2.2 Thrust Reversers ..............................................................................................................9
2.2.3 Automatic Speedbrake System ......................................................................................11
2.2.4 Airplane System Summary ............................................................................................14
2.3 Flight Data Recorder Maintenance and Documentation ..........................................................14
3. Safety Issues ..............................................................................................................................16
3.1 Pilot Performance/Operational Issues ......................................................................................16
3.1.1 Deployment of the Thrust Reversers and Speedbrakes .................................................16
3.1.2 Pilot Responsibilities After Landing .............................................................................21
4. Conclusions ...............................................................................................................................24
4.1 Findings....................................................................................................................................24
4.2 Probable Cause.........................................................................................................................25
5. Recommendations ....................................................................................................................26
5.1 New Recommendations ...........................................................................................................26
5.2 Previous Recommendations Reiterated in this Report .............................................................26
Board Member Statements .........................................................................................................28
6. Appendix: Cockpit Voice Recorder Transcript ....................................................................32
i

NTSB Aircraft Incident Report
Figures
Figure 1. A photograph of the incident airplane, viewed from behind, where it came to a stop in
the snow off the departure end of runway 19 at JAC. .................................................................... 3
Figure 2. A photograph of the front of the incident airplane where it came to a stop in the snow
off the departure end of runway 19 at JAC. .................................................................................... 4
Figure 3. A photograph of the center console in the incident airplane‘s cockpit, with the reverse
thrust lever and speedbrake levers marked. .................................................................................... 7
Figure 4. Two diagrams showing the cockpit center console, the speedbrake lever and its
linkages, and components of the automatic speedbrake system. The no-back clutch mechanism
has been highlighted in the side view diagram on the left. A photograph of the speedbrake
actuator and no-back clutch mechanisms has been superimposed on the front view to show those
components‘ relative positions within the center console. ........................................................... 13
ii

NTSB Aircraft Incident Report
Abbreviations and Acronyms
AC advisory circular
CFR Code of Federal Regulations
CVR cockpit voice recorder
EICAS engine indication and crew alerting system
FAA Federal Aviation Administration
FDR flight data recorder
JAC Jackson Hole Airport
MLG main landing gear
MU unit used to designate a friction value representing runway surface conditions
NPRM notice of proposed rulemaking
NTSB National Transportation Safety Board
ORD Chicago O‘Hare International Airport
SAFO Safety Alert for Operators
SNPRM supplemental notice of proposed rulemaking
SOP standard operating procedure
iii

NTSB Aircraft Incident Report
Executive Summary
This report discusses the December 29, 2010, incident involving American Airlines
flight 2253, a Boeing 757-200, N668AA, which ran off the departure end of runway 19 and came
to a stop in deep snow after landing at Jackson Hole Airport (JAC), Jackson Hole,
Wyoming. The occupants were not injured, and the airplane sustained minor damage.
The National Transportation Safety Board determines that the probable cause of this
incident was a manufacturing defect in a clutch mechanism that prevented the speedbrakes from
automatically deploying after touchdown and the captain‘s failure to monitor and extend the
speedbrakes manually. Also causal was the failure of the thrust reversers to deploy when initially
commanded. Contributing to the incident was the captain‘s failure to confirm speedbrake
extension before announcing their deployment and his distraction caused by the thrust reversers‘
failure to initially deploy after landing.
This report addresses increased pilot awareness of and focus on speedbrake and thrust
reverser deployment during landing. The incident pilots were familiar with winter operations at
JAC and thoroughly assessed the pertinent weather, airport, and airplane performance
information while en route to JAC. The pilots determined that they could land safely at JAC
using normal deceleration procedures (thrust reversers, speedbrakes, and wheel brakes).
However, the precise timing of the unloading of the main landing gear just after touchdown that
coincided with the deployment of the thrust reversers resulted in a rare mechanical/hydraulic
interaction in the thrust reverser system, and the thrust reversers were locked in transit instead of
continuing to deploy. Further, an unrelated defect in the automatic speedbrake mechanism
prevented the speedbrakes from automatically deploying. Although the pilots could have
manually deployed the speedbrakes at any time during the landing roll, neither pilot recognized
that the speedbrakes had not automatically deployed (as selected) because they were both
distracted by, confused by, and trying to resolve the thrust reverser nondeployment.
Safety issues identified in this incident include the following:
Inadequate pilot training for recognition of a situation in which the speedbrakes
do not automatically deploy as expected after landing. As stated above, the
incident pilots did not recognize that the speedbrakes had not automatically deployed
after touchdown. This report cites three other events in which the pilots were
distracted and did not ensure deployment of the speedbrakes. Prompt speedbrake
deployment after touchdown and monitoring of the speedbrake system during the
landing roll is especially critical for increased braking effectiveness when landing on
short and/or contaminated runways.
Lack of an alert to warn pilots when speedbrakes have not automatically
deployed during the landing roll. Although American Airlines had a company
requirement for a callout confirming automatic speedbrake deployment after
touchdown, the pilots still became distracted from ensuring that the speedbrakes
deployed properly. A clearly distinguishable and intelligible alarm would help bring
iv

NTSB Aircraft Incident Report
the monitoring pilot‘s attention back to the speedbrakes and enable him to manually
deploy them in case they do not automatically deploy.
Lack of guidance for pilots of certain Boeing airplanes to follow when an
unintended thrust reverser lockout occurs. Because of the lockout condition that
was created in the thrust reverser system during the incident landing, the flight crew
needed to stow the reverse thrust lever to unlock the system before attempting to
redeploy the thrust reversers. However, postincident interviews with American
Airlines pilots indicated that company pilots were not aware of this technique, and
moving the reverse thrust levers to the stow position during the landing roll would not
be an intuitive action.
Lack of pilot training for multiple emergency and abnormal situations. About the
time that the speedbrakes did not deploy, the thrust reverser system also did not
deploy. In this incident, the pilots encountered an abnormal situation when both the
speedbrake and thrust reverser systems did not deploy as expected. Although the
pilots were not aware of the specific solution to the thrust reverser abnormality, the
pilots were aware that they could manually deploy the speedbrakes at any time.
However, because of the pilots‘ focus on and efforts to resolve the thrust reverser
anomaly, neither pilot noticed the abnormal speedbrake situation until the airplane
had come to a stop off the end of the runway. If the incident pilots had received
training on the handling of multiple emergency or abnormal situations, they might not
have focused exclusively on the thrust reverser nondeployment and may have
recognized the speedbrake nondeployment earlier.
Lack of pilot training emphasizing monitoring skills and workload management.
After the first officer attempted to deploy the thrust reversers, the captain took
command of the reverse thrust levers. By doing this, the captain deviated from normal
company procedures regarding the pilot flying/pilot monitoring responsibilities
during the landing roll. If the captain had adhered to his monitoring responsibilities
during the landing roll, it is more likely that he would have recognized that the
speedbrakes had not automatically deployed and corrected the situation by manually
deploying them.
As a result of this investigation, three new safety recommendations are issued and three
existing safety recommendations are reiterated to the Federal Aviation Administration.
v

NTSB Aircraft Incident Report
1. The Incident
On December 29, 2010, about 1138 mountain standard time,1 American Airlines
flight 2253, a Boeing 757-200, N668AA, ran off the departure end of runway 19 after landing at
Jackson Hole Airport (JAC),2 Jackson Hole, Wyoming. The airplane came to rest about 730 feet
past the departure end of the runway in deep snow. The 179 passengers, 2 pilots, and 4 flight
attendants on board were not injured, and the airplane sustained minor damage. The airplane was
registered to and operated by American Airlines as a scheduled domestic flight under the
provisions of 14 Code of Federal Regulations (CFR) Part 121. Instrument meteorological
conditions in light snow prevailed at JAC at the time of the landing, and the flight operated on an
instrument flight rules flight plan. The flight originated from Chicago O‘Hare International
Airport (ORD), Chicago, Illinois, about 0941 central standard time.
Pilot statements and cockpit voice recorder (CVR) data3 indicated that the first officer
was the pilot flying and the captain was the pilot monitoring during the flight from ORD to JAC.
During postincident interviews, both pilots stated that they were familiar with the challenging
landing conditions that could exist at JAC in the winter (for example, slippery runway conditions
and relatively high landing weights,4 which were common during the ski season). As a result,
they said they were especially vigilant and began preparing for the approach and landing at JAC
early during what they described as an uneventful flight from ORD to JAC.
According to American Airlines‘ 757/767 Performance Manual, pilots should confirm
landing performance limits just before landing, using the actual runway conditions at the time. If
the runway braking action is determined to be less than good,5 pilots are required to use the
company-provided landing charts to confirm that the runway length is adequate for the landing.6
American Airlines‘ 757/767 Performance Manual further states that pilots ―must use the most
adverse reliable and appropriate braking action report or the most adverse expected conditions
for the runway, or portion of the runway, that will be used for landing when assessing the
required landing distance.‖
1 All times in this report are mountain standard time, unless otherwise noted, based on a 24-hour clock.
2 The airport is located at an elevation of 6,491 feet. Runway 01/19, the only runway surface at JAC, is
6,300 feet long and 150 feet wide, with runway safety areas at both ends that comply with Federal Aviation
Administration (FAA) standards. The runway is paved with porous friction course asphalt and has a -0.6 percent
downward slope from north to south, with a drop in elevation of 38 feet.
3 A partial transcript of the CVR recording is appended.
4 According to American Airlines‘ 757/767 Operating Manual, the incident airplane‘s maximum landing weight
was 198,000 pounds. The airplane‘s actual landing weight for the incident landing was 194,055 pounds.
5 According to American Airlines‘ 757/767 Performance Manual, if the landing conditions upon arrival indicate
dry or wet/good braking action conditions, no further assessment is required because the company‘s dispatch
requirements ―are sufficient to assure adequate performance at the time of landing.‖
6 American Airlines requires its pilots to ensure that they will not exceed the runway available, interpolating
when using the landing distance charts if needed; however, exact calculations are not required.
1

NTSB Aircraft Incident Report
The captain gathered the most current information about the JAC weather7 and runway
conditions, including wind, MU8 runway friction values, and pilot braking action reports.
Although the pilot of a corporate jet that landed on runway 19 about 1 hour before the incident
airplane reported ―poor‖ braking action on the last one-third of the runway, he also reported
―good‖ braking action on the first two-thirds of the runway.9 The most current MU friction
values for the runway were obtained about 18 minutes before the incident airplane‘s landing and
indicated values of 0.43, 0.43, and 0.39 for the first, second, and third sections of the runway,
respectively. The incident pilots also reviewed information about potential delays and/or
alternate airports for various circumstances. In addition, the pilots specifically discussed the
airplane‘s performance at high density altitude airports.
After reviewing this information and American Airlines‘ 757 landing charts for JAC, the
pilots determined that they were legal and safe to land on runway 19 based on the airplane‘s
landing weight, the existing wind, the weather, and the ―good‖ braking action that was reported
on the first two-thirds of the runway, and they continued preparations to land at JAC. A review
of the CVR data revealed that the pilots discussed landing within the first 1,000 feet of the
runway and then making efforts to slow the airplane using automatic wheel brakes10 and thrust
reversers11 as promptly as possible to maximize braking effectiveness while on the ―good‖
braking action portion of the runway. To this end, during their preparations for landing, the pilots
armed the speedbrakes12 for automatic deployment after touchdown and selected the automatic
wheel brakes ―MAX AUTO‖ setting.
The pilots‘ statements, CVR data, and National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB)
airplane performance study indicated that the approach to the runway was normal and that the
airplane‘s touchdown was ―firm‖ and about 600 feet beyond the approach threshold. The first
officer (the pilot flying) reported that he tried to deploy the thrust reversers promptly after
7 The most recent JAC automatic terminal information service weather observation received by the captain
indicated, in part, the following conditions: a broken layer of clouds at 400 feet above the ground and an overcast
layer of clouds at 1,000 feet above ground level; wind out of 190° at 6 knots; and 3/4-mile visibility in light snow.
8 The FAA Aeronautical Information Manual defines MU as a unit ―used to designate a friction value
representing runway surface conditions.‖ MU friction values range from 0.0 to 1.0, with 0.0 as the lowest friction
value and 1.0 as the theoretical best friction value available. Friction testing devices provide MU values for the first,
second, and third sections of the runway length.
9 The CVR recorded the incident pilots discussing this pilot report and the captain describing the corporate jet as
a ―Challenger thirty, so little light guy...it‘s a light airplane.‖
10 The airplane‘s wheel brake system is intended to slow and/or stop the airplane after landing and during taxi
operations. It consists of brakes installed on each of the main landing gear wheels that are hydraulically-actuated
manually (by the pilots‘ application of pressure to the brake/rudder pedals) or automatically when autobrakes are
selected before touchdown.
11 The airplane‘s thrust reversers help the airplane decelerate after landing by diverting the flow of the engine
thrust and are generally more effective at higher ground speeds. The airplane‘s thrust reverser system is further
discussed in section 2.2.2 of this report.
12 The airplane‘s speedbrakes are used to help the airplane decelerate after landing by disrupting the airflow
over the wings, maximizing the airplane‘s weight on its landing gear and increasing the wheel brakes‘ effectiveness.
The speedbrakes are generally more effective at higher ground speeds. The NTSB notes that although the terms
―speedbrakes‖ and ―spoilers‖ are commonly used interchangeably by manufacturers, operators, and pilots, this
report uses the term ―speedbrakes‖ because Boeing and American Airlines predominantly use that term when
referring to 757 landing procedures. The airplane‘s speedbrake system is further discussed in section 2.2.3 of this
report.
2

NTSB Aircraft Incident Report
touchdown, but they did not initially deploy. After the first officer made several attempts to
deploy the thrust reversers, the captain took over the thrust reverser controls and eventually
succeeded in deploying the thrust reversers with about 2,100 feet of runway remaining.13
Subsequently, the airplane continued off the departure end of the runway, coming to a stop in
deep snow off the end of the paved surface. Both pilots stated that they were unaware until after
the airplane came to a stop that the speedbrakes, which they had armed for automatic
deployment, had not automatically deployed after touchdown as they expected. (The NTSB notes
that the pilots could have manually extended the speedbrakes at any time during the landing roll
had they recognized the nondeployment.)
When the airplane was stopped in the snow, the captain told the flight attendants not to
evacuate immediately; he checked on the condition of the passengers and the airplane and
determined that it was safer to remain in the airplane until help arrived. In the meantime, the first
officer advised JAC air traffic control and American Airlines operations personnel that they had
run off the end of the runway and would need assistance. All occupants remained on board the
airplane until JAC ground personnel reached the airplane to assist in the occupants‘ egress.
Postincident examination of the airplane revealed minor damage to the airplane. Figures 1 and 2
show the incident airplane where it came to a stop in the snow off the departure end of
runway 19 at JAC.
Figure 1. A photograph of the incident airplane, viewed from behind, where it came to a stop in
the snow off the departure end of runway 19 at JAC.
13 Flight data recorder data indicated that the thrust reversers deployed about 18 seconds after the airplane‘s
initial touchdown and reached full reverse power about 10 seconds later.
3

NTSB Aircraft Incident Report
Figure 2. A photograph of the front of the incident airplane where it came to a stop in the snow
off the departure end of runway 19 at JAC.
4

NTSB Aircraft Incident Report
2. Investigation and Analysis
2.1 Pilot Performance/Operational Issues
Postincident interviews and American Airlines‘ records indicated that the incident pilots
were certificated in accordance with federal regulations and were current and qualified in the
incident airplane in accordance with American Airlines‘ training requirements. Records also
showed that the captain had 19,645 hours of total flight time, including 10,779 hours in the 757,
and the first officer had about 11,800 hours of total flight time, including 3,582 hours in the 757.
Additionally, company records showed that both pilots had completed American Airlines‘ JAC
special airport training14 and had recent (and, in the captain‘s case, extensive) experience flying
into JAC.15
Company records showed that both pilots had 3 days off before starting duty the day
before the incident. During postincident interviews, both pilots described normal activities and
sleep patterns: the captain indicated that he received his normal 7 1/2 to 8 hours of sleep per
night and needed no special rest breaks, and the first officer described a schedule that included
about 8 1/2 to 9 1/2 hours of sleep per night and stated that he was well rested for the incident
flight. Neither pilot reported any recent changes in their health, financial, or personal
circumstances. The NTSB‘s review of company records, postincident pilot interviews, and
work/sleep/wake and medical histories revealed no evidence of fatigue or any medical or
behavioral conditions that might have adversely affected the pilots‘ performance during the
incident flight.
2.1.1 Pilot Actions in Preparation for Landing at Jackson Hole Airport
A National Weather Service winter weather advisory indicating heavy snowfall, gusty
wind, and possible blowing snow conditions was in effect for the JAC area the morning of the
incident. However, the JAC automated weather observing system reports logged immediately
before and after the incident landing indicated relatively benign conditions, with wind out of the
southwest at 8 to 10 knots. In addition, other ground observations at JAC around the time of the
incident indicated only light snow. The captain obtained numerous updates on JAC weather and
runway conditions throughout the flight, including a braking action report from the pilot of the
corporate jet that landed on runway 19 at JAC ahead of them. The corporate jet pilot reported
―good‖ braking action on the first two-thirds of the runway, with ―poor‖ braking action on the
14 American Airlines requires special airport training for its pilots who are operating into airports with
challenging landing conditions. The company‘s JAC-related special airport training required pilots to (1) review the
approved photo and Ops Advisory pages in the company flight manual and (2) review the software-based airport
familiarization program for JAC. The familiarization program for JAC involved a 5-minute computer animation
with narration that showed an instrument approach to a visual landing on runway 19 and instructed pilots to land in
the first 1,000 feet of the runway. The video also cautioned that the last 1,500 feet of runway 19 might be ―slick‖
due to frozen snow melt.
15 The captain estimated that he had flown into JAC 300 to 400 times in his career, and the first officer stated
that he had flown into JAC frequently, including 4 times with the captain during the month of the incident.
5

NTSB Aircraft Incident Report
last one-third of the runway. This runway condition assessment was supported by the most recent
reported MU values, which translated to ―wet/good‖ on the first two-thirds of the runway.16
The pilots‘ before-landing calculations accounted for the weather and reported runway
conditions as well as the airplane‘s loading and performance capabilities17 and indicated that,
based on the reported ―wet/good‖ runway braking action, the airplane could land and be stopped
safely on the runway using normal techniques (including a combination of speedbrakes, wheel
brakes, and thrust reversers, as needed, after touchdown). In preparation for this landing, the
pilots had moved the speedbrake lever to the ―armed‖ position. Consistent with American
Airlines‘ before-landing guidance for such a landing, they selected the ―MAX AUTO‖
deceleration option for the main landing gear (MLG) autobrake system.
The NTSB concludes that the pilots had the pertinent weather, airport, and airplane
performance information necessary to determine whether a safe landing could be made at JAC,
and they had taken all appropriate before-landing actions; based on that information, the pilots
appropriately decided that a landing at JAC was in accordance with company and performance
guidelines.
2.1.2 Pilot Actions During the Landing at Jackson Hole Airport
According to the NTSB‘s airplane performance study, the airplane approached runway 19
at JAC at a standard glidepath of about 3° and touched down about 600 feet beyond the runway‘s
approach threshold. After the airplane touched down, the pilots had about 5,700 feet of runway
surface remaining on which to stop the airplane. According to the pilots‘ prelanding calculations
and the NTSB‘s postincident airplane performance study, this available runway surface should
have been sufficient for the airplane to come to a complete stop.
Flight data recorder (FDR) data indicated that the signal from the air/ground sensing
system transitioned from ―air‖ mode to ―ground‖ mode at 1137:43.5.18 FDR data also showed
that, about 1 second later, the airplane‘s air/ground signal temporarily transitioned back to ―air‖
mode before transitioning back to ―ground‖ mode for the remainder of the landing roll.19 This
brief cycling of the air/ground signal during a landing is not uncommon; however, in this case, it
coincided with the first officer‘s attempt to deploy the thrust reversers immediately after
touchdown. The first officer‘s rapid deployment of the thrust reversers was understandable and
consistent with his awareness of the runway conditions at JAC and his intention to stop the
airplane in the first two-thirds of the runway. However, because of the precise timing of these
events, a rare mechanical/hydraulic interaction occurred in the thrust reverser system, and the
16 About 1051, the pilots sent a message to the dispatcher saying that they would stop in the first two-thirds of
the runway, indicating that they were aware that the last one-third of the runway was more slippery than the first
two-thirds of the runway.
17 Among other documents, the pilots reviewed American Airlines‘ 757/767 Performance Manual (including the
braking action chart) and the company‘s 757 Special Landing Analysis chart for JAC.
18 For the purpose of this report, this time will be considered the time of initial touchdown at JAC. The NTSB
normally confirms the time of touchdown by examining the normal acceleration parameter; however, this parameter
was not operating properly during the incident landing.
19 This cycling of the air/ground sensing system is discussed further in section 2.2.1 of this report.
6

NTSB Aircraft Incident Report
thrust reversers were locked in transit instead of continuing to deploy. Although the pilots
reported multiple movements of the reverse thrust levers after the air/ground sensing system
returned to ―ground‖ mode, the thrust reversers did not begin to redeploy until about 18 seconds
after touchdown.20
American Airlines‘ procedures indicate that the pilot monitoring is to monitor the
speedbrake lever and the thrust reverser and autobrake systems during the landing roll.
Specifically with regard to the speedbrake lever, the procedures indicate that the pilot monitoring
should observe and call out the position of the speedbrake lever after landing and that, if the
speedbrakes do not automatically deploy, the captain should manually deploy the speedbrakes
(regardless of which pilot had monitoring responsibilities). American Airlines‘ 757/767
Operating Manual states, ―Pilot awareness of the speedbrake lever during the landing phase is
important in the prevention of overrun.‖ Further, American Airlines‘ 757/767 Operating Manual
also states, ―Without speedbrakes deployed after touchdown, braking effectiveness may be
reduced initially by as much as 60 [percent].‖ Figure 3 shows the throttle console in the incident
airplane‘s cockpit, with the reverse thrust lever and speedbrake levers marked.
Figure 3. A photograph of the center console in the incident airplane’s cockpit, with the reverse
thrust lever and speedbrake levers marked.
The incident airplane‘s CVR transcript showed that, about 2.8 seconds after the airplane‘s
initial touchdown, the captain stated, ―deployed,‖ likely referring to deployment of the
speedbrakes, and then, about 1.2 seconds later, ―two in reverse,‖ likely referring to thrust
reversers.21 According to the CVR, at 1137:48.0 (about 0.5 seconds after the captain called out
―two in reverse‖), the first officer stated, ―no reverse‖ in a strained voice. About 0.8 second later,
20 The thrust reversers‘ operation is discussed further in section 2.2.2 of this report.
21 The captain‘s callouts were erroneous, as neither system had deployed.
7

NTSB Aircraft Incident Report
the CVR recorded the captain stating, ―I got it‖; then, about 0.6 second later, the captain stated,
―get the...reverse.‖ At 1137:51.1, the CVR simultaneously recorded the captain stating, ―I got it
you steer‖ and the first officer stating, ―I can‘t get it.‖ About 1.8 seconds later, the CVR recorded
the first officer responding, ―I‘m steerin‘.‖
According to American Airlines‘ 757/767 Operating Manual, the pilot monitoring is to
call out ―deployed‖ when speedbrakes deploy or ―no spoilers‖ if the speedbrakes do not deploy.
Regarding reverse thrust operation, American Airlines‘ 757/767 Operating Manual states that if
the green ―REV‖ annunciation light is not illuminated on either engine, the pilot monitoring is to
call out ―no reverse [pertinent engine]‖; the Operating Manual does not specify language for a
positive reverse thrust deployment callout. (American Airlines lists the pilot flying‘s tasks during
landings as moving the thrust reverser levers to reverse ―smoothly and without delay‖ after
landing, using brakes as needed, and then stowing the thrust reversers as the airplane decelerates
through about 60 knots.)
At the NTSB‘s request, Boeing completed a 757-200 landing performance analysis using
criteria obtained from the incident airplane‘s FDR and assuming a variety of runway braking
action and speedbrake and manual thrust reverser deployment conditions consistent with the
incident landing. Boeing‘s calculations confirmed that, under the landing conditions the pilots
anticipated (touchdown about 800 feet from the end of the runway with ―wet/good‖ braking
action and with prompt automatic deployment of speedbrakes and manual deployment of thrust
reversers after touchdown), the airplane would have stopped about 3,800 feet down the
6,300-foot-long runway. The calculations also showed that, under similar touchdown and runway
conditions, with thrust reverser deployment delayed until 21.8 seconds22 after initial touchdown
but prompt speedbrake deployment, the airplane would have stopped about 4,500 feet down the
runway, still on the runway surface. Finally, the performance calculations support that the
runway surface conditions were consistent with ―wet/good‖ conditions as expected by the flight
crew. A stopping distance of about 6,800 feet, about 500 feet beyond the end of the paved
runway surface, was calculated for ―wet/good‖ runway conditions, delayed thrust reverser
deployment, and no speedbrake deployment. It is apparent that the immediate deployment of the
speedbrakes after landing is critical for situations in which stopping distance is a prime concern
(as was the case at JAC on the day of the incident). American Airlines recognizes this in its
757/767 Operating Manual, which states that braking effectiveness may be reduced by as much
as 60 percent when speedbrakes are not deployed.
The NTSB concludes that if either pilot had observed that the speedbrakes had not
automatically deployed and subsequently corrected the situation by manually deploying them,
the airplane‘s stopping distance would have been greatly decreased.
22 During the incident landing, the thrust reversers deployed about 18 seconds after landing but did not reach
full power until about 10 seconds later. Because Boeing‘s analysis tool cannot factor in this gradual engine spool-up
after thrust reverser deployment, the analysis has the thrust reversers deploying at full power 21.8 seconds after
landing.
8

NTSB Aircraft Incident Report
2.2 Airplane Systems
This section will further discuss the operation and postincident testing of the airplane‘s
air/ground sensing system, thrust reversers, and automatic speedbrakes. (The pilots‘ monitoring
of these systems during the landing roll is further discussed in section 3 of this report.)
2.2.1 Air/Ground Sensing System
The 757‘s air/ground sensing system provides air/ground status information to various
airplane systems, including the automatic speedbrake and thrust reverser control systems. Two
proximity sensors on each of the airplane‘s two MLG assemblies provide ―ground‖ signals to the
air/ground sensing system when both MLG assembly tilt angles reduce from about
9.6° rear-wheels-down when the gear is extended during flight to less than about
5.4° rear-wheels-down during touchdown. When all four proximity sensors sense that this has
occurred, ―ground‖ signals are sent to pertinent airplane systems, allowing their activation. The
air/ground signal will cycle from ―ground‖ mode to ―air‖ mode and back to ―ground‖ mode
again if any one of the four proximity sensors on the MLG assemblies momentarily ―unloads‖
(fails to meet the specified tilt angle) after touchdown.
Postincident inspections and testing of the incident airplane‘s air/ground sensing system
components (including all proximity sensors, switches, and relays) revealed that the system was
fully functional. No failures were detected that would have affected the system‘s operation
during the landing at JAC. Although FDR data showed that, about 1 second after initial
touchdown, the ―ground‖ signal transitioned back to ―air‖ mode for about 0.5 second before
transitioning back to ―ground‖ mode for the remainder of the landing roll, the air/ground sensing
system was capable of normal operation; therefore, this brief interruption of the ―ground‖ signal
most likely resulted from a momentary unloading of one or both of the MLG assemblies. (The
NTSB did not have data to verify that an ―unloading event‖ occurred because the normal
acceleration parameter on the FDR was not operating properly during the incident landing.)
During its investigation of this incident, the NTSB reviewed the air/ground data from the
previous 13 landings performed in the incident airplane and identified 2 additional landings
during which intermittent air/ground signals similar to those observed in the JAC incident data
occurred. Neither of these events prevented the deployment of the thrust reversers as occurred
during the incident landing because the relative timing of the MLG unloadings and the thrust
reverser lever movements were different from the incident landing. The operation of these
systems during the incident landing is discussed below.
2.2.2 Thrust Reversers
The airplane‘s thrust reverser system is designed to help the airplane decelerate after
landing by diverting the direction of the engine exhaust gas stream. Although use of thrust
reversers is not required during landing, when they are deployed early in the landing roll, thrust
reversers help reduce the airplane‘s stopping distance. To initiate thrust reverser extension, the
airplane must detect that it is on the ground, and the pilot flying must lift the reverse thrust levers
9

NTSB Aircraft Incident Report
up and rearward to their interlock position. The thrust reversers would begin to deploy,23 and,
after they reach their mid-travel positions, the pilot must move the reverse thrust levers further
aft to apply reverse thrust, increasing engine power as required to help stop the airplane.
Each engine has its own thrust reverser control system that hydraulically deploys the
thrust reversers based on electrical and mechanical commands it receives from the following
sources: pilot inputs; the air/ground sensing system; the thrust reverser auto restow system;24 and
multiple thrust reverser system sensors, relays, and feedback signals. The thrust reverser systems
function independently except for the common signal they receive from the air/ground system.
Because a thrust reverser extension command is a function of several system inputs, an
intermittent loss of any one of these inputs could briefly interrupt continuous deployment.
During the incident landing, a momentary interruption in the ―ground‖ signal from the
air/ground sensing system occurred almost immediately after the thrust reversers began to
extend.25 Such interruptions in the ―ground‖ signal are not unusual (commonly occurring during
bounced landings, for example). Under normal circumstances, such interruptions are benign and
go undetected by pilots because the thrust reversers continue to deploy automatically when the
air/ground ―ground‖ signal resumes with no further pilot action required. However, during the
incident landing, the thrust reversers locked in transit and did not continue to deploy. The pilots
made multiple attempts to deploy the thrust reversers after the air/ground sensing system
returned to ―ground‖ mode; however, the thrust reversers did not deploy until about 18 seconds
after touchdown.
Postincident testing of the thrust reverser control system verified that each engine‘s thrust
reverser system was fully operational and that each engine‘s thrust reverser translating sleeve
extended and retracted per the specified maintenance requirements. A detailed review of the
thrust reverser control system design identified one potential scenario in which the momentary
change from ―ground‖ mode to ―air‖ mode could cause each engine‘s thrust reverser sync-lock26
mechanism to lock in transit. Such a lockout could only occur if a momentary change from the
―ground‖ mode to the ―air‖ mode occurs in the instant (1) immediately after the thrust reversers
begin to extend after touchdown and (2) in the split second before the thrust reverser‘s auto
restow system is activated. This lockout would prevent movement of the thrust reversers until
about 5 seconds after a pilot moves the reverse thrust levers back to their stowed position,
allowing the thrust reverser system to deactivate and begin deployment again when commanded.
23 The thrust reverser control system is designed to deploy the thrust reversers when the air/ground sensing
system sends a ―ground‖ signal and the thrust reverser levers are in their interlock position. Each reverse thrust lever
is restricted to an intermediate or interlock position until its respective thrust reverser reaches its mid-travel position.
24 This system is activated when sensors detect that the thrust reverser‘s translating sleeves are no longer in their
stowed positions. Its main design purpose is to automatically return the translating sleeves to their stowed positions
if they move from the stowed position when the aircraft is airborne.
25 FDR data showed that the thrust reversers began to deploy about 1 second after the airplane touched down,
and, while the reversers were deploying, the air/ground sensing system transitioned back to ―air‖ mode for about
0.5 second before it transitioned back to ―ground‖ mode for the remainder of the landing roll.
26 The sync-lock mechanism is intended to prevent the thrust reverser translating sleeves from accidentally
extending due to failures within the thrust reverser system.
10

NTSB Aircraft Incident Report
FDR data showed that one of the pilots (likely the captain, based on postincident
statements and CVR data) briefly moved the reverse thrust levers to the stowed position and then
back to the interlock position about 10 seconds after touchdown. The data further showed that
the reverse thrust levers were moved forward of their interlock position allowing the full
deployment of the thrust reversers about 18 seconds after touchdown.27 During postincident
interviews, both incident pilots indicated that they were unaware of a circumstance in which the
thrust reversers could be locked in transit and were unaware of the actions needed to correct the
situation. (Further, American Airlines‘ personnel in general, including the company‘s 757/767
fleet manager, were unaware of this rare event or its resolution.) It is likely that, during their
postlanding manipulations of the reverse thrust levers, the pilots moved the levers forward
enough to deactivate the system because when the levers returned to their interlock position, the
system was properly configured, and the thrust reversers deployed normally.
The NTSB concludes that, although the momentary interruption of the air/ground
system‘s ―ground‖ signal after touchdown would not normally adversely affect the deployment
of thrust reversers, in this case it coincided almost precisely with the initial deployment of the
thrust reversers and resulted in the thrust reversers locking in transit instead of continuing to
deploy.
2.2.3 Automatic Speedbrake System
The airplane‘s automatic speedbrake system consists of six panels on the upper surface of
each wing that can be automatically or manually deployed at touchdown to disrupt the airflow
over the wings, maximizing the weight on the landing gear and increasing the wheel brakes‘
effectiveness.28 Although automatic speedbrakes are not generally required for landings29
(because pilots can manually deploy the speedbrakes at any time), use of the automatic
speedbrakes can ensure prompt deployment of the speedbrakes after touchdown and optimize the
airplane‘s deceleration during the landing roll.30
To deploy the speedbrakes automatically, the pilots should move the speedbrake lever to
its ―armed‖ detent before touchdown.31 By design, when the speedbrake lever is ―armed,‖ the
speedbrake actuator automatically drives the speedbrake lever to its full aft position after the
airplane touches down (indicated by the air/ground sensing system signal‘s transition from
―air‖ mode to ―ground‖ mode). This normally results in the deployment of the speedbrake panels
to their fully deployed position. However, if the air/ground sensing system reverts back to
27 Consistent with the FDR data, a video taken through a left-side window by a passenger during the landing
showed that the left thrust reverser began to deploy shortly after touchdown, then stopped moving and remained in a
partially deployed position for about 10 seconds. The video then showed the left thrust reverser closing for about
6 seconds before finally fully extending.
28 These panels are also used when the airplane is in flight to assist the ailerons in lateral control and to increase
drag and reduce lift. Boeing refers to these panels as ―spoilers‖ when referring to their lateral control function.
29 According to American Airlines‘ 757/767 Minimum Equipment List, the automatic speedbrake function is
required to be operable at the time of dispatch for flights into JAC.
30 As previously noted, an airplane‘s braking effectiveness may be reduced by as much as 60 percent when
speedbrakes are not deployed promptly after landing.
31 If the pilots do not move the speedbrake lever to its armed detent before touchdown, the system will normally
automatically deploy the speedbrakes when the thrust reversers are deployed.
11

NTSB Aircraft Incident Report
―air‖ mode after the automatic speedbrake actuator has begun to extend, the speedbrake actuator
will retract automatically and retract the speedbrake lever. If the air/ground sensing system signal
subsequently transitions back to ―ground‖ mode, the speedbrake system is designed to again
automatically drive the speedbrake lever to extend the speedbrakes.
Review of FDR and CVR data confirmed that the pilots positioned the speedbrake lever
to its armed detent at 1130:29, about 7 minutes before landing at JAC. FDR data further indicated
that, after the airplane touched down, the speedbrake lever initially remained in its armed
position, and then briefly moved from, and then returned to, its armed position where it remained
for the duration of the landing. This movement of the speedbrake lever coincided with the
air/ground sensing system cycling from ―ground‖ mode to ―air‖ mode and then back to
―ground‖ mode. The speedbrake lever‘s movement from its ―armed‖ position indicated that the
automatic speedbrake actuator had partially extended upon initial touchdown.32 Normally, when
the air/ground signal indicated ―ground‖ a second time, the automatic speedbrake system would
have driven the speedbrake lever beyond its ―armed‖ position to fully deploy the speedbrakes.
The NTSB concludes that, although the pilots had armed the automatic speedbrake system
during the approach to JAC, the automatic speedbrakes failed to automatically deploy as
designed after touchdown.
Initial examination and testing of the incident airplane‘s automatic speedbrake system
and its components revealed no evidence of a malfunction that would have prevented normal
operation during the incident landing.33 However, the automatic speedbrake mechanism was
removed and examined after the incident airplane experienced another automatic speedbrake
system nondeployment on March 31, 2011.34 This examination revealed a latent assembly defect
in the no-back clutch mechanism35 that intermittently prevented the speedbrake actuator from
automatically driving the speedbrake lever beyond its armed detent to extend the speedbrakes.
Specifically, one of the four speedbrake lever braking pins was improperly secured, which
allowed it to intermittently rotate within its assembly and prevented the no-back clutch from
transmitting the torque from the automatic speedbrake actuator to the speedbrake lever.
Additional testing showed that this condition would only occur when the actuator was attempting
to drive the speedbrake lever towards the ―up‖ (speedbrakes extended) position and would not
occur when the actuator was retracting the speedbrake lever. Further, it was noted that this defect
only affected the speedbrakes‘ automatic deployment function and would not have prevented the
pilots from manually deploying the speedbrakes. Figure 4 contains two diagrams showing the
cockpit center console, the speedbrake lever and its linkages, and components of the automatic
speedbrake system. The no-back clutch mechanism has been highlighted in the side view
32 If the automatic speedbrake actuator had not begun to extend the speedbrakes at touchdown, the system‘s
temporary retraction of the speedbrake lever could not have occurred.
33 During postincident examination, the NTSB discovered that a bushing had not been installed in the automatic
speedbrake actuator‘s aft mounting attachment. This defect would not have prevented the automatic speedbrake
actuator from operating.
34 The NTSB notes that the pilots involved in the March 31, 2011, event noted the automatic speedbrake
system‘s nondeployment and manually extended the speedbrakes; the airplane stopped on the available runway
surface.
35 The no-back clutch mechanism allows the speedbrake lever to be moved freely (independently) from the
automatic speedbrake actuator and allows an input (extend/retract) from the automatic speedbrake actuator to drive
the speedbrake lever.
12

NTSB Aircraft Incident Report
diagram on the left. A photograph of the speedbrake actuator and no-back clutch mechanisms
has been superimposed on the front view to show those components‘ relative positions within the
center console.
Figure 4. Two diagrams showing the cockpit center console, the speedbrake lever and its
linkages, and components of the automatic speedbrake system. The no-back clutch mechanism
has been highlighted in the side view diagram on the left. A photograph of the speedbrake
actuator and no-back clutch mechanisms has been superimposed on the front view to show
those components’ relative positions within the center console.
Because the effects of this defect were intermittent and the defect‘s visual detection
would require disassembly of the no-back clutch mechanism (a function usually performed by
the manufacturer or another external facility, not the operator), an operator would not likely have
detected the defect during normal maintenance testing. When this assembly defect in the no-back
clutch was identified, the manufacturer of the no-back clutch told NTSB investigators that the
company was not aware of any instances involving similar anomalies in other no-back clutch
units.36 As a result of this investigation, the manufacturer clarified its documentation to ensure
proper assembly of the no-back clutch units. In addition, in its March 7, 2012, submission for
36 Since this anomaly was identified, the company has received 32 no-back clutch assembly units from operators
for repair. Although 2 of these units were returned with complaints of ―auto speedbrake failed to deploy,‖
disassembly and repair of all 32 units revealed no similar anomalies.
13

NTSB Aircraft Incident Report
this incident, Boeing indicated that it is ―currently writing a Fleet Team Digest[37] article that will
contain the information concerning the no-back clutch and its possible intermittent anomaly.‖
The NTSB concludes that a manufacturing defect in the incident airplane‘s speedbrake
no-back clutch mechanism prevented the speedbrakes from automatically deploying during the
incident landing.
2.2.4 Airplane System Summary
In summary, the NTSB‘s postincident examination and testing of the airplane‘s systems
revealed no evidence of any failures of the air/ground sensing system during the incident
landing, indicating that the intermittent air/ground signal occurred when the MLG unloaded just
after touchdown. The investigation also showed that the thrust reverser system and its
components were capable of normal operation during the incident landing. In addition, although
an intermittent mechanical defect in the automatic speedbrake system intermittently prevented
the speedbrakes from automatically deploying, the defect would not have prevented the pilots
from manually deploying the speedbrakes, if they had noted that the speedbrakes did not deploy.
2.3 Flight Data Recorder Maintenance and Documentation
The incident airplane was equipped with an L-3/Fairchild FA2100 FDR, which contained
about 44 hours of data, including the incident flight. The FDR was removed from the incident
airplane and transported to NTSB headquarters in Washington, D.C., for downloading and data
evaluation.38 The NTSB‘s readout of the incident airplane‘s FDR revealed that several of the
parameters (including normal acceleration, a mandatory parameter) were not functioning
properly.
In addition, during its investigation, the NTSB identified issues with American Airlines‘
FDR system-related documentation, its FDR-related maintenance program, and the Federal
Aviation Administration‘s (FAA) oversight of that maintenance program. Specifically, although
operators are required by federal regulations to maintain accurate documentation of their FDR
configurations, American Airlines personnel could not provide appropriate documentation and/or
wiring diagrams for the incident airplane‘s FDR installation. In addition, the investigation
showed that American Airlines‘ improper performance of the two tests intended to ensure that
37 Boeing‘s Fleet Team Digest is a publication the company uses to provide model-specific maintenance updates
and other fleet-specific information that its operators can access through Boeing‘s customer service website at
<http://www.boeing.com/commercial/aviationservices/myboeingfleet/index.htm> (accessed May 3, 2012).
38 While acting as a party to the investigation and before transporting the FDR to NTSB headquarters, the FDR
was flown to Tulsa, Oklahoma, where American Airlines personnel downloaded the FDR data. Because this
unauthorized downloading of FDR data was not consistent with its signed commitment to the party system and
could have destroyed evidence critical to the investigation, American Airlines was removed as a party to this
investigation.
14

NTSB Aircraft Incident Report
the FDR system is operating properly39 allowed numerous FDR discrepancies to go undetected,
which hampered FDR data collection and evaluation during this investigation.
Since 1972, the NTSB has made numerous recommendations to address problems
regarding installation and maintenance of FDR systems, inaccurate or incomplete
documentation, and inadequate oversight of the maintenance programs that should have
identified these problems.40 These FDR-related issues, although not factors related to the cause
of this incident, did affect the NTSB‘s ability to evaluate the available data.
39 A reasonableness check is performed every 4,000 flight hours and involves downloading and
evaluating/auditing FDR data. A system functional check is performed by maintenance personnel every 72 months
to ensure that all FDR system components and interfaces are working properly.
40 For additional information, see (a) Uncontrolled Impact With Terrain, Fine Airlines Flight 101, Douglas
DC-8-61, N27UA, Miami, Florida, August 7, 1997, Aircraft Accident Report NTSB/AAR-98/02 (Washington, D.C.:
National Transportation Safety Board, 1998); (b) Loss of Pitch Control on Takeoff, Emery Worldwide Airlines,
Flight 17, McDonnell Douglas DC-8-71F, N8079U, Rancho Cordova, California, February 16, 2000, Aircraft
Accident Report NTSB/AAR-03/02 (Washington, D.C.: National Transportation Safety Board, 2003); and (c) Crash
During Landing, Executive Airlines (doing business as American Eagle) Flight 5401, Avions de Transport
Regional 72-212, N438AT, San Juan, Puerto Rico, May 9, 2004, Aircraft Accident Report NTSB/AAR-05/02
(Washington, D.C.: National Transportation Safety Board, 2005), which are available at <http://www.ntsb.gov>.
15

NTSB Aircraft Incident Report
3. Safety Issues
3.1 Pilot Performance/Operational Issues
3.1.1 Deployment of the Thrust Reversers and Speedbrakes
The NTSB evaluated possible explanations for the captain‘s erroneous and premature
speedbrake and thrust reverser callouts and his failure to monitor and notice that the speedbrakes
had not automatically deployed as expected. The only positive indication available to the captain
to verify extension of the speedbrakes would have been the aft position of the handle, which was
visible from and within reach of both pilots‘ seating positions. FDR data showed that the
speedbrake handle was in the armed position for landing and began to move within 1 second of
landing but did not continue to move to the aft (extended) position as expected. The NTSB
concludes that the captain‘s erroneous speedbrakes ―deployed‖ callout was likely made in
anticipation (not in confirmation) of speedbrake deployment after he observed the speedbrake
handle‘s initial movement; after the ―deployed‖ callout was made, both pilots likely presumed
that the reliable automatic speedbrakes were functioning normally and focused on the thrust
reverser problem.
About the same time that the speedbrake handle started to move, the amber annunciation
lights on the engine indication and crew alerting system (EICAS) display would have provided
the captain with a cue that the thrust reversers were in transition.41 Although the captain called
out ―two in reverse,‖ this callout was not based on the illumination of the green annunciation
since the air/ground sensing system cycling to ―air‖ mode prevented the reversers from
deploying at that time. (Immediately following the captain‘s ―two in reverse‖ callout, the CVR
recorded the first officer stating, ―no reverse‖ in a voice that sounded strained.) Given the typical
reliability of the thrust reverser system,42 it is likely that the captain made the callout because he
expected normal thrust reverser deployment after seeing the amber EICAS annunciation.
The NTSB considered whether operational stress during the approach and landing might
have resulted in the captain‘s erroneous callouts, his failure to monitor, and both pilots‘ failure to
notice that the speedbrakes had not deployed. Under normal circumstances, landing at JAC can
be challenging; it is located at an elevation of 6,451 feet, it is surrounded by mountainous terrain,
and runway 19 is relatively short (6,300 feet) and has a downward slope of 0.6 percent. On the
day of the incident, additional challenges were present; there was snow on the runway, the
approach was flown to published minimums, and the airplane was near its maximum landing
weight. Although operating into JAC in such conditions can be demanding and requires pilots to
maintain a heightened alertness throughout the approach and landing, the operational conditions
encountered by the incident pilots were typical for JAC in winter. CVR data showed that the
incident pilots had prepared thoroughly for the landing and accurately determined they had
sufficient performance to land safely on the runway. Despite the challenges of the approach and
41 Green annunciations would illuminate when the thrust reversers are fully deployed.
42 As previously stated, in normal bounced landing circumstances, the thrust reversers would redeploy when the
air/ground ―ground‖ signal resumes (as would the automatic speedbrakes) with no further pilot action required.
16

NTSB Aircraft Incident Report
landing, the pilots seemed alert but not stressed. During postincident interviews, the pilots stated
they had no concerns about landing at JAC as they were both experienced flying into the airport,
they were familiar with the conditions that existed, and they felt comfortable with the approach.
Therefore, the NTSB considers it unlikely that those challenges created operational stress during
the incident landing.
However, despite their experience flying into JAC and their adequate preparation for the
landing, the flight crew tunneled their attention on deploying the thrust reversers. Although the
CVR recorded both pilots commenting that the airplane was not slowing on the runway, the
captain did not return to his monitoring duties. Neither pilot was able to broaden his focus
enough to look at the big picture and notice that the speedbrakes (the more crucial deceleration
tool) had not deployed.
The NTSB notes that the captain‘s expectation that the speedbrake and thrust reverser
systems would function reliably and routinely as the pilots had observed them function during
multiple previous landings might have led to less vigilant monitoring of those systems. Research
has shown that reliable automated systems can lead pilots to have trust and confidence that the
system will function as designed. In some cases, this expectation of proper system functioning
can lead to poor system monitoring and failure to detect automation malfunctions.43
Further, pilots are often required to divide their attention between multiple tasks in
routine flight operations, and the challenges involved in managing multiple tasks is heightened
during unexpected or abnormal situations. In this incident, the pilots encountered an abnormal
situation when both the speedbrake and thrust reverser systems did not deploy as expected. The
NTSB has previously issued safety recommendations addressing issues related to pilots handling
multiple emergency and/or abnormal situations. For example, Safety Recommendations A-09-24
and -2544 asked the FAA to do the following:
Establish best practices for conducting both single and multiple emergency and abnormal
situations training. (A-09-24)
Once the best practices for both single and multiple emergency and abnormal situations
training asked for in Safety Recommendation A-09-24 have been established, require that
these best practices be incorporated into all operators‘ approved training programs.
(A-09-25)
On August 11, 2009, the FAA indicated that it published a notice of proposed rulemaking
(NPRM), titled ―Qualifications, Service, and Use of Crewmembers and Aircraft Dispatchers,‖ on
January 12, 2009 (74 Federal Register 1280). The FAA stated that the NPRM addressed these
recommendations by requiring the inclusion of scenario-based training. The FAA indicated its
43 See (a) J.D. Lee and N. Moray, ―Trust and the Allocation of Function in the Control of Automatic Systems,‖
Ergonomics, vol. 35 (1992), pp. 1243-1270; (b) J.D. Lee and N. Moray, ―Trust, Self-Confidence, and Operators‘
Adaptation to Automation,‖ International Journal of Human-Computer Studies, vol. 40 (1994), pp. 153-184; and
(c) R. Parasuraman, R. Molloy, and I.L. Singh, ―Performance Consequences of Automation-Induced
‗Complacency,‘‖ The International Journal of Aviation Psychology, vol. 3(1) (1993), pp. 1-23.
44 For additional information, see In-Flight Left Engine Fire, American Airlines Flight 1400, McDonnell
Douglas DC-9-82, N454AA, St. Louis, Missouri, September 28, 2007, Aircraft Accident Report NTSB/AAR-09/03
(Washington, D.C.: National Transportation Safety Board, 2009), which is available at <http://www.ntsb.gov>.
17

NTSB Aircraft Incident Report
belief that these scenario-based training events constituted the establishment of industry best
practices for single and multiple emergency and abnormal situations training. The FAA also
planned to revise FAA Order 8900.1 and/or issue a notice to require FAA inspectors to withdraw
approval of 14 CFR Part 121 training programs that do not incorporate scenario-based training
and practices. The FAA further indicated that training programs conducted under its Advanced
Qualification Program45 were already required to make use of scenario-based line operational
evaluations. Finally, the FAA stated that it planned to review the existing and proposed
regulatory and policy framework to determine whether additional guidance or requirements were
necessary.
On April 2, 2010, the NTSB replied that the use of scenario-based training would address
the intent of Safety Recommendations A-09-24 and -25 but asked how the training scenarios will
be developed, noting that the collection of best practices related to such scenarios would remain
necessary. The NTSB noted that issuance of the final rule proposed in the January 12, 2009,
NPRM would give the FAA the regulatory framework to require such training but that, without a
guide to best practices, inspectors and operators would have difficulty creating effective
programs. The NTSB stated that the FAA‘s planned review of the regulatory and policy
framework to determine whether additional guidance or requirements were necessary might
include the collection and dissemination of the recommended best practices. Pending the
outcome of that review and issuance of the final rule proposed in the NPRM,46 Safety
Recommendations A-09-24 and-25 were classified ―Open—Acceptable Response.‖
Although pilots are typically trained to handle a single emergency, the reality is that
pilots are sometimes faced with situations that include multiple abnormalities or emergencies.
Training for multiple emergency and abnormal situations would provide pilots the opportunity to
practice the processes and skills needed to handle such events so that the pilots would be better
prepared to handle them in flight. Trained pilots would have better situational awareness and
would be better equipped to adapt a learned process to the specific circumstances and time
constraints of the event they encounter. This increased situational awareness is even more
important in time-critical situations when pilots must respond quickly.
The NTSB has investigated a number of accidents and incidents in which pilots have
focused their attention on one emergency or abnormal situation at the exclusion of another,
which ultimately resulted in an accident.47 The incident at JAC shows that even experienced
45 The FAA‘s Advanced Qualification Program is a voluntary alternative to the traditional regulatory
requirements for pilot training and checking that was designed to (1) increase aviation safety through improved
training and evaluation and (2) be responsive to changes in aircraft technology, operations, and training
methodologies.
46 A related supplemental notice of proposed rulemaking (SNPRM), published May 20, 2011 (76 Federal
Register 29336), contained the relevant portions of the NPRM. The SNPRM is further discussed in section 3.1.2 of
this report.
47 Two examples of such accidents are the accidents involving Southwest Airlines flight 1248 at Chicago,
Illinois, and Empire Airlines flight 8284 at Lubbock, Texas. For additional information, see Runway Overrun and
Collision, Southwest Airlines Flight 1248, Boeing 737-7H4, N471WN, Chicago Midway International Airport,
Chicago, Illinois, December 8, 2005, Aircraft Accident Report NTSB/AAR-07/06 (Washington, D.C.: National
Transportation Safety Board, 2007) and Crash During Approach to Landing, Empire Airlines Flight 8284, Avions de
Transport Regional, Aerospatiale Alenia ATR 42-320, N902FX, Lubbock, Texas, January 27, 2009, Aircraft
Accident Report NTSB/AAR-11/02 (Washington, D.C.: National Transportation Safety Board, 2011), both of which
are available at <http://www.ntsb.gov>.
18

NTSB Aircraft Incident Report
pilots with adequate preparation for a given situation (in this case, landing) can become
distracted and narrow their attention when multiple abnormal situations occur. If the incident
pilots had received training for multiple emergency or abnormal events, they likely would have
evaluated the situation as a whole rather than focusing on the most salient cue, which was the
thrust reversers not deploying.
During the landing at JAC, two qualified, experienced pilots encountered simultaneous
system abnormalities when neither the thrust reversers nor the automatic speedbrakes deployed
as expected. Although the pilots were not aware of the specific solution to the thrust reverser
abnormality (which they only resolved through persistent efforts and luck), all pilots know that
they could manually deploy the speedbrakes at any time during a landing. However, because of
their focus on and efforts to resolve the thrust reverser anomaly, neither pilot noticed the
abnormal speedbrake situation until the airplane had come to a stop off the end of the runway.
The NTSB concludes that if the incident pilots had received specific pilot training on the
handling of multiple emergency or abnormal situations, they might not have focused exclusively
on the thrust reverser nondeployment and might have been more likely to recognize and properly
resolve the speedbrake nondeployment during the landing. Therefore, the NTSB reiterates Safety
Recommendations A-09-24 and -25.
Research has shown that abnormal and emergency situations increase pilot workload,
require additional effort to manage effectively, and can result in task fixation and narrowing of
attention.48 In addition, the NTSB‘s review of accident and incident data shows that unexpected
events or anomalies during approach and landing have the potential to distract pilots‘ attention
from routine actions and cues, which, in some cases, has resulted in runway overruns. In one
such case (the June 1, 1999, accident involving American Airlines flight 1420 at Little Rock,
Arkansas),49 the NTSB concluded that the pilots were focused on expediting the landing because
of impending weather and did not ensure that the automatic speedbrakes were armed before
landing, nor did they detect this omission and manually extend the speedbrakes while they were
struggling to stop the airplane and maintain directional control during the landing roll. In another
such case (the December 8, 2005, accident involving Southwest Airlines flight 1248 at Chicago,
Illinois),50 the NTSB concluded that the pilots‘ first use of the airplane‘s autobrake system
during a challenging landing distracted them from the otherwise routine task of thrust reverser
deployment. In addition, the NTSB is currently investigating the April 26, 2011, runway overrun
incident involving Southwest Airlines flight 1919, a 737, at Chicago Midway International
Airport, Chicago, Illinois.51 Postincident interviews indicate that these pilots were distracted by a
series of events during the approach, did not arm the automatic speedbrake system before
landing, and did not recognize that the speedbrakes had not deployed, as they were focused on
braking performance.
48 R.K. Dismukes, G.E. Young, and R.L. Sumwalt, ―Cockpit Interruptions and Distractions: Effective
Management Requires a Careful Balancing Act,‖ ASRS Directline, vol. 10 (1998) pp 4-9.
49 For additional information, see Runway Overrun During Landing, American Airlines Flight 1420, McDonnell
Douglas MD-82, N215AA, Little Rock, Arkansas, June 1, 1999, Aircraft Accident Report NTSB/AAR-01/02
(Washington, D.C.: National Transportation Safety Board, 2001), which is available at <http://www.ntsb.gov>.
50 For additional information, see NTSB/AAR-07/06.
51 Preliminary information about this incident, NTSB case number DCA11IA047, can be found online at
<http://www.ntsb.gov/aviationquery/index.aspx>.
19

NTSB Aircraft Incident Report
Prompt speedbrake deployment after touchdown and monitoring of the speedbrake
system during the landing roll is especially critical for increased braking effectiveness when
landing on short and/or contaminated runways. Although the CVR only recorded the pilots
discussing thrust reverser deployment during their preparations for landing at JAC, American
Airlines‘ 757/767 Operating Manual states that braking effectiveness may be reduced by as
much as 60 percent when speedbrakes are not deployed; therefore, both pilots were aware that
the timely deployment of the speedbrakes was critical in reducing stopping distance after
landing. In addition, based on the captain‘s training and American Airlines‘ procedures, he
should have been aware of his responsibility for monitoring the speedbrake system during the
landing roll.
According to CVR data, rather than confirming the speedbrake deployment using the
available cues, both pilots were focused on the thrust reversers‘ nondeployment and became
preoccupied with attempting to deploy them. The NTSB concludes that, although American
Airlines‘ manuals and procedures emphasized the importance of prompt speedbrake deployment
and monitoring of the speedbrake lever after landing, the pilots did not recognize that the
speedbrakes had not automatically deployed because both pilots were distracted by, confused by,
and trying to resolve the thrust reversers‘ nondeployment. Therefore, because timely deployment
and monitoring of speedbrakes is so critical to landing safely, the NTSB recommends that the
FAA require all operators of existing speedbrake-equipped transport-category airplanes to
develop and incorporate training to specifically address recognition of a situation in which the
speedbrakes do not deploy as expected after landing.
As a result of the June 1, 1999, American Airlines flight 1420 accident at Little Rock,
Arkansas, the NTSB issued Safety Recommendation A-01-50, which asked the FAA to do the
following:
For all 14 [CFR] Part 121 and 135 operators, require a callout if the spoilers
[speedbrakes] do not automatically or manually deploy during landing and a callout when
the spoilers [speedbrakes] have deployed, and verify that these operators include these
procedures in their flight manuals, checklists, and training programs. The procedures
should clearly identify which pilot is responsible for making these callouts and which
pilot is responsible for deploying the spoilers [speedbrakes] if they do not automatically
or manually deploy.
In response, the FAA amended Advisory Circular (AC) 120-71, ―Standard Operating Procedures
for Flightdeck Crew Members,‖ Appendix 1, to include more explicit language regarding the use
of spoiler/speedbrake systems. The AC now contains, as recommended standard operating
procedures (SOP), dual pilot confirmation that the automatic speedbrakes have been armed
before landing and a callout by the pilot monitoring to verify that the speedbrakes deployed (or
failed to deploy) after landing.52
American Airlines had incorporated the speedbrake-related SOPs into its operations,
manuals, and training, and the incident pilots were aware of them. Further, CVR data and
postincident interviews confirmed that both pilots were aware of and focused on the need for
52 As a result of the FAA‘s actions, on December 10, 2003, the NTSB classified Safety
Recommendation A-01-50 ―Closed—Acceptable Action.‖
20

NTSB Aircraft Incident Report
rapid deceleration during the incident landing. However, despite the captain‘s callout confirming
that the speedbrakes had deployed, both pilots were too distracted by the thrust reversers‘
nondeployment to notice that the speedbrakes had not deployed.
This incident shows that, even with a company requirement for a callout confirming
automatic speedbrake deployment after touchdown and with pilots who have a heightened
awareness of the need for prompt speedbrake deployment during a landing, pilots can still
become distracted from ensuring that the speedbrakes deploy properly. In addition, the pilot
monitoring in the December 8, 2005, Southwest Airlines flight 1248 accident at Chicago,
Illinois, was also required to call out the absence of speedbrake deployment (and manually
deploy speedbrakes), and he did not notice the speedbrakes‘ nondeployment either, as both pilots
quickly focused their attention on braking performance after touchdown. The NTSB concludes
that a clearly distinguishable and intelligible alert that activates when the speedbrakes do not
automatically deploy after landing would have provided the pilots with a salient warning that the
speedbrakes did not function as expected and would likely have brought the captain‘s attention
back to the speedbrakes and resulted in manual speedbrake deployment. Although previously
type-certificated airplanes may not be equipped for installation of an aural alert system,53 with
more modern technology such a system could easily be designed into newly type-certificated
airplanes. Therefore, the NTSB recommends that the FAA require all newly type-certificated
14 CFR Part 25 airplanes to have a clearly distinguishable and intelligible alert that warns pilots
when the speedbrakes have not deployed during the landing roll.
Because of the rare mechanical/hydraulic interaction that locked the thrust reversers in
transit during the incident landing, the pilots needed to stow the reverse thrust lever to unlock the
system before attempting to redeploy the thrust reversers. However, postincident interviews with
American Airlines pilots indicated that company pilots were not aware of this technique,54 and
moving the reverse thrust levers to the stowed position during the landing roll would not be an
intuitive action. The NTSB concludes that if the incident pilots had known that when the thrust
reversers locked in-transit they needed to move the reverse thrust levers to the stowed position
before attempting to deploy them again, the deployment of the thrust reversers could have
occurred much earlier in the landing roll. Therefore, the NTSB recommends that the FAA
require Boeing to establish guidance for pilots of all relevant airplanes to follow when an
unintended thrust reverser lockout occurs and to provide that guidance to all operators of those
airplanes.
3.1.2 Pilot Responsibilities After Landing
American Airlines‘ procedures indicate that the pilot monitoring (in this case, the
captain) is to monitor the automatic speedbrake and thrust reverser deployment during the
landing roll, whereas the pilot flying (in this case, the first officer) is to deploy the thrust
reversers, apply manual brakes as required, and stow the thrust reversers as the airplane
53 The NTSB notes that the previously issued safety recommendation regarding pilot training to address
nondeployment of speedbrakes could address this issue for crews in previously type-certificated airplanes.
54 The potential for this type of event had not been identified before this incident; as a result, Boeing‘s 757/767
guidance did not contain related guidance. According to Boeing, its Pratt and Whitney engine-equipped 757/767
airplanes are the only Boeing-manufactured airplanes that have the potential for this type of event.
21

NTSB Aircraft Incident Report
decelerates. However, in this case, CVR data showed that about 0.8 second after the first officer
stated ―no reverse,‖ the captain was taking command of the thrust reverser levers. By assuming
control of the thrust reversers before the first officer could attempt to resolve the situation, the
captain deviated from normal company procedures regarding the pilot flying/pilot monitoring
responsibilities during the landing roll. Specifically, if the captain had adhered to his monitoring
responsibilities during the landing roll, it is more likely that he would have recognized that the
speedbrakes had not automatically deployed and corrected the situation by manually deploying
them, increasing the airplane‘s braking effectiveness significantly.
The NTSB has previously issued safety recommendations related to pilot workload
management and monitoring skills, including Safety Recommendation A-07-13,55 which asked
the FAA to do the following:
Require that all pilot training programs be modified to contain modules that teach and
emphasize monitoring skills and workload management and include opportunities to
practice and demonstrate proficiency in these areas.
On January 12, 2009, the FAA published an NPRM titled ―Qualifications, Service and
Use of Crewmembers and Aircraft Dispatchers.‖ Based on comments that the FAA received on
this NPRM, on May 20, 2011, the FAA published a supplemental notice of proposed rulemaking
(SNPRM) that proposed additional training requirements for flight crewmembers, including the
use of flight simulators for training of flight crewmembers.
On July 15, 2011, the NTSB submitted comments to the FAA on the SNPRM and noted
its general support for the requirements proposed in the SNPRM. In its comments, the NTSB
noted that proposed section 121.1213 partially addressed Safety Recommendation A-07-13 by
requiring that pilot training include opportunities to practice and demonstrate proficiency in
monitoring skills and workload management. However, the SNPRM did not propose a
requirement for modules that teach and emphasize these subjects. The NTSB indicated that the
FAA would need to require pilot training programs to include appropriate training modules on
these subjects during which crews would be required to practice and demonstrate proficiency.
On November 7, 2011, the FAA published Safety Alert for Operators (SAFO) 11011,
―Runway Excursions at Jackson Hole Airport (JAC),‖ which ―emphasizes the importance of
implementing and following SOPs and training for flightcrews.‖56 The related supplement
provided best practices and mitigation strategies that include emphasis on pilot monitoring
responsibilities and the manual deployment of speedbrakes if they do not automatically deploy.
However, the information in the SAFO is only guidance, and this incident demonstrates the need
for the changes proposed in the SNPRM.
55 For additional information, see Crash During Approach to Landing, Circuit City Stores, Inc., Cessna
Citation 560, N500AT, Pueblo, Colorado, February 16, 2005, Aircraft Accident Report NTSB/AAR-07/02
(Washington, D.C.: National Transportation Safety Board, 2007), which is available at <http://www.ntsb.gov>.
Also, see Northwest Airlines, Inc., [Flight 255], McDonnell Douglas DC-9-82, N312RC, Detroit Metropolitan
Wayne County Airport, Romulus, Michigan, August 16, 1987, Aircraft Accident Report NTSB/AAR-88/05
(Washington, D.C.: National Transportation Safety Board, 1988) and Delta Air Lines, Inc., [Flight 1141],
Boeing 727-232, N473DA, Dallas-Fort Worth International Airport, Dallas, Texas, August 31, 1988, Aircraft
Accident Report NTSB/AAR-89/04 (Washington, D.C.: National Transportation Safety Board, 1989).
56 American Airlines provides its pilots with 757 Special Landing Analysis charts for JAC.
22

NTSB Aircraft Incident Report
The NTSB concludes that, if the importance of adhering to pilot monitoring
responsibilities were included in flight crew training, the incident captain would have been less
likely to assume control of the reverse thrust levers (a pilot flying responsibility) during the
landing roll and remained focused on his pilot monitoring duties; as a result, he most likely
would have observed that the speedbrakes had not automatically deployed. This incident
reinforces the need for the FAA to move as quickly as possible to issue a final rule based on the
SNPRM. Thus, the NTSB reiterates Safety Recommendation A-07-13.
23

NTSB Aircraft Incident Report
