

I !
1 DecksSer 31. 1988
Aircraft Accident/Incident Sllmnary Report $.Performing Dryanizarion
Code
I
17- Authorls) 8.Performing G:ganiration
i 1 Report No.
i
herforming Organization same and Address t i0.Uork Unit No.
4929
11.Contract or Grant No.
Period Covered
Agency Name aod Address
Aircraft Accident/incident
1 I
Sumary Report,
f
NAT'IONltl TRANSPORTATION SAFETY BOARD 1988
I
Washington, D. C. 20594 I !4.Sponsorinq Agency C_odIe_
I
I
j This doclrment is available
maintenance, landing go-around, training
to the pubiic throush the
National Technical
1 Infomation Service,
Spr:ngfield, Virginia 2216
i9.Securiry Classification 2O.Security Classification 21.H~.o f Pages 22.Price
(of this report) (of this page)
UNCLASSIFIEC UNCLASSIFIED 15
NTSB Form 1765.2 (Rev. 9/74)

I
Netisna!
Transpor%etisn
Safety Board
Washinam. D.C. 20594
File No.: 193
Aircraft Operator: Southern Air Transpsa' Inc.
Aircraft Type and Registration: Lockheed L-382G. N517SJ
Location: Travis Air Force Base, Caiifornia
Date and Time: April 8,1987,1732 pdt
Occupant injuries: 5 fatal
Aircraft Damage: Destroyed
Ti p e Occurrence: Collision with the ground
P ase of Operation: Landing go-around
Circumstances of the Accident
Southern Air Transport (SAT) flight 517,. a Lockheed L-38PG operating out of
Travis Air Force Base (AFB), California, crashed at 1732 pacific daylight time on
Aprils. 1937, following a practice instrument landing system (ILS) approach to
runway 21L at Travis AFB. The flight was conducted in visual rneteoroiugical
sonditions under the provisions of 14 Code of Federal Regulations Part 91 for the
training of two first officer candidates and a flight engineer candidate all of whom
had been hired by SAT in the previous 30 days. The captain and the flight engineer
check airman aboard the flight had extensive experience in the L-382G airplane and
its similar militaiy C-130 version. There were no passengers or cargo aboard the
flight. Its a result: uf the accident. the airplane was destroyed by 8r ound impact
forces ar3 the effects of a postcrash fire. All five crewmen were atally injured.
Ground damaqe was limited to an airfield perimeter fence that had been struck by
the ieftwing amut 1,000 feettu the left of the runway and ground scars associated
with the impact.
Flight 517 departed Travis AFB about 1157, April 8, 1987, on ?he first of a series
of training flights conducted in N517SJ on that day. The flight proceeded to
Sacramento, California, where training was conducted and the airplane was
refueled. It returned to Travis AFB, and after a partial crew change the fiight
departed at 1445 for a 3-hour focai training flight. During the flight, the crew
conducted approaches and practice tandings ax IJlcCiet!an AFB near 5acramento.
The flight returned PoTravis AFB for the completion of the training.
Conversationr recorded by the cockpit voice recorder (CVE)i ndicated that it was
the captain's intention to make a fulf stop landing following the lU runway 24L
approach that preceded the accident. During the practice instrument approach, the
airplane was being flown by a first officer candidate who had no previous
L-382K-130 fkight experience. At 1729:36, the flight engineer reported that the
flaps were full (down) and the before landing checklist war complete. As the first
officer operated the flight controls, the captain provided instructional guidance
regarding altitude. airplane attitude, airspeed, and power corrections during the
approach. Communications among the cockpit crewinembers were routine until
moments before touchdown.

2
At 1731:2?,th e captain remarked, "Okay, just set the nose down hew . . .you're
too high to sart rounding out. Don't add any power . . . okay, a little bit of
rudder. . .okay, let the airplane down, let the nose down." lust before touchdown
.
the captain advised, "All right now, come off on the power. . just raise the nose a
little bit here." As the airpiane touched down the captain exclaimed, "Oh, oh, oh.
I've got it, I've ot it"; he asstimed control of the airplane and began a go-around.
The CVR recorzed sounds similar to engine winddown and a sound associated with
a momentary electricas power interruption (to the CVR) as the captain assumed
control and the wheels touched down at 1731: 40.
At 1731:45, the captain asked, "We lost an engine?" Responses from the flight
engineer check airman and the flignt engineer candidate were, respective!y. "We
lost me," and "Two, §kip." (Skip was a nickname of the captain.) At 1731 :52,a n
unidentified crewmember said, 'Flaps up." At 1731:57,t he captain stated, "Power
on." Tine sound of impact was recorded ai 1732:OO.
The flight data recorder (FDR) indicated that, the airplane touched down initially
at 105 knots indicated airspeed (KIAS). The airplane heading remained within 10"of
the runway heading for about 10 seconds after the captain assumed control.
Afterward, the airpiane heading deviated rapidly to the left asthe airplane entered
a gradually steepening lei3 bank. The FDR airspeed trace indicated ?hat airspeed
also remained essentially stabilized for about 14 seconds, but deteriorated to
88 KIAS while the airplane turned left about 88" during the attempted landing go-
around. Based an the heading change rate, it was calculated that the airplane's
angle of bank reached about 50" before impact with the fence.
Twenty-five witnesses to the crash were located on and about Travis AFB and in
the control tower. They described a normal approach to runway t4L until the
airpiane pitched upward near the touchdown point and rolled to the left. One of
the tower air traffic controllers said he saw a puff ~f black smoke at ?he
approximate airplane touchdown point on the runway. Since tire scrubbing ai
touchdown ususily pmduces a grey-white smoke, the Safety Board considered that
the tower controller may have observed an indication of a powerpiant problem at
the point where the go-around was initiated.
Other witnesses said the airplane did not, subsequently, climb higher than
300 feet. The witnesses described a left bank at low altitude which steepened until
the airplane collided with the airfield perimeter fence in a nose-low and steep left
wing low attitude. An explosion, a ball of fire, ard smoke was observed
immediately after the crash.
A Travis AFB weather observation taken at 1739, a few minutes after the crash,
was: ciouds--3.000 feet scattered, 12,OOG feet scattered, 25,000 feet thin broken;
visibility-40 miles; ternperature--7l0F; dew point--§@; wind from 220" at 10 knots;
and aftirneter--30.04 InHg. kt 1728:58, when flight 517 was beginning the
approach, Travis tower advised, . . wind 220 at 10, cleared to iand runway 24L.
'I.
Caution, wake turbulence preceding heavy B52." The captain of flight 5?7
acknowledged the information and read Saek the landing clearance There were no
further radio transmissions from the flight. 6 t was determined that the preceding
B52 had been 7 miles ahead of flight 517 and had made a touch-and-go landing on
runway 2tL 3 f R minutes before the accident. Consequently, wake vortices from
the B52 were slot considered io be a factor in the accident.

3
Ernerrrenfy Respoose
Travis AFB control tower personnel initiated crash n2tifications at 1732. Travis
AFR Fire Department firefighting and rescue operations were in progress at the
crash site at 1737. The postcrash fire was under control at 3744 and was declared
out a: 7754,e xcept for small magnesium fires along the wreckage path. Emergency
medical peroonnel responded to the crash with the fire department but iouna that
the crewmembers were deceased. The causes of death were attributed to multiple
traumatic injuries. Postmortem examinations revealed no medical or toxicological
factors relevant to the accident.
Travis AFB and the Solano County Office of Emergency Services have disaster
plans with specific guidelines and checkliss to be used ir?s uch emergencies. Those
plans are practiced annually in joint training exercises and were irnpiemented in
response to this crash. The Safety Board found the response to be timely and
appropriate to the circumstances of the accident.
The Accident Site
The wreckage path began at the airport perimeter fence, 1,048 feet left of the
runway 21L centerline and 5,034 feet down the runway from the approach end.
a
The dama ed top rail of the chainlink tence was contoured to the shape of the
leading e ge of the wing. Airplane debris and several ground scars, beginning
19 feet east of the fence. marked the path of the airplane as it crossed 302 feet of
open pasture. Fragments of the left wing, including the navigation light fixture and
the fuel jettison pipe, were among the first airplane pieces found along the path.
The path was curved, initially oriented to 120'' magnetic but changing to 095"
before the airplane came to re>?. Seweral weJJ-defiined propetkr slash marks in the
ground were observed along the path. The cockpit area of the airplane was heavdy
damaged by impact forces and fire. The remainder of the fuselage revealed little
fire damage. The left wing, outboard of the number 1 engine nacel!e, was
fragmented. A large wing section (exclusive of engines), comprising the entire right
win%.ihe center win3 section, and a large left wing section was largely intact but
exhl lted Impact an postcrash fire damage. The engines and propellers were
separated from the wing sections.
All of the major sections of the airplane and all control surfaces were found
along the wreckage path. Examination of the airplane revealed no evidence of
preimpact faiiure or malfunction involving the airplane structure or fii3ht control
surfaces. There was no evidence of an infiight fire or explosion. The wreckage
indicated that the landing gear were fully extended and the flaps were extended
about 35 percent with na flap dissymmetry at impact. (According to SAT
procedures, the normal position for the flaps during a landing go-around, is
50 percent.) The aileron, rudder, and elevator trim tabs were found in neutral trim
positions. The aileron, rudder, and elevator booster assemblies operated when
functionally tested after the accident.
All sf the crossfeed fuef valves were found closed and all of the engine main
tank fuel shutoff valves were open. Refueling records, fuel consumption
calcuiations, and postcrash fuel gage readings indicated that there was a substantia!
amount of fuel remaining in each of the main tanks at the time of the crash. None
of the engine fuel heateristrainer assemblies were obstructed by foreign matefiat.
Examination of the fuei system did not reveal any indication of a problem thst
would cause a loss of engine power.

4
Examination of the left horizontal stabilizer and elevator aft of the number 2
engine revealed a discolored area with a definite splash or spray pattern.
Laboratory analysis later confirmed the presence of engine oil (the type used by
SAT) streaking on the top surface. One of the witnesses reported that he had
observed a vapor or mist trail aft of the number 2 engine that was different than
the smoke patterns aft of the other engines during the approach to runway 21L.
The Safety Board determined that there had been recent, significant leakage of
engine oil from the number 2 engine. However, the analysis did not confirm
positively that there was siE n ificant feakage of en3 ine oil on the accident flight or
that leakage from the num er .? engine was iimite to engine oil.
The Engines and Bropellerz
N5179 was powered by four Allison 501-OZZA turboprop engines driving
Hamilton Standard 54H60-117 four-blade, full-feathering, reversible-pitch
propeilers. The engines were serviced with Exxon 2380 turbo oil, and the propellers
were serviced with MIL-H-5606E hydraulic fluid.
The Safety Board's examination and testing of the engines, propellers, and
related accessories was conducted in stages, beginning at the accident site and then
continuing at overhaul and testsites.
All of the propeller components that were not attached to the individual
assemblies were found along the wreckage path except for a few small blade
sections of the number 3 propeller that were found about 700 feet north-northeast
of the remainder of the number 3 propeiler. The damage to the propeller and to
the right side of the fuselage revea!ed evidence that the rotating number 3
propeller contacted the .fuselage during the impact and breakup of the airplane.
The blade roots of ail 16 propeller blades were retaiced within their respective
hubs. The propeller blades of engines 1 and 2 showed evidence of less power at
impact than did the blades of engines 3 and 4. The propeller disassembly
inspections revealed blade shim plate impact marks which were consistent with
impact blade angles of 28" to 30" for propeller numbers 1,2, and 3 and a blade angle
of 33" to 3 Pf or propelier number 4. Further examination and testing revealed no
evidence of pre-impact malfunction of the propellers.
All of the engines had suffered impaC damage, but only the compressor inle',
and accessory gearbox section of the number 1 engine power section suffered major
fire damage. The accessory gearbox uf the number !e ngine was destroyed by fire.
The accessory gearbox of the number 2 engine was attached; the xcessory
earboxes of the numbers 3 and 4 engines were separated and damaged by impact
forces. All of the power section magnetic chip detectors were free of magnetic
particles.
The numbers 1,3, and 4 en% i ne power sections were disassembled to expose the
compressor sections, th2 com ugtlon sections, the turbine sections, the engine
bearings, and the compressor air bleed valves. The number 2 power section was
disassembled to expose the turbine section; the cornpressor air Meed valves and
engine accessories were removed iof further examination. The number 2 power
section was subsequently reassembled (substituting serviceable parts where
necessary) fora test run.

5
Aif of the internaf wrfaces and components of the numbers 4 and 2 engine
compressus were coated with a tar-like residue. A similar but !ess extensive oWar
residue coated the Internal somponents of the number 3 and 4 compresses. The
number 3 and 4 rrrrnpressors also had ingested mud or dirt in the impast sequence,
&utd irt ingestion was not noted in compressors 1 and 2. Similady, it was noted that
the number t and 2 eompressor 5th and 10th stage air bleed valve interior anti
exterior surfaces were coated with an oilkar residue that impeded the proper
actuation of some of the 5th stage values. The contact surfaces between the bodies
of two of the number 2 compressor fifth stage air bleed valve assemblies and their
respective pistons showed a heavy unbroken coating of residue indicating that
these valve assernblieswere not CbSing during engine operation. A third fifth stage
air bleed valve from the same engine showed evidence of partial closing during
engine operation. Attempts to positively identify the adhering residue were
inconclusive.
The turbine sections of the numbers 3 an3 4 engines exhibited heavy blade rub
and bending or wrlin% o f bladesin the direction opposite turbine rotor rotation. By
contrast. the turbine lades of the number 1 en% i ne evidenced light blade rub;
turbine blade rub was not observed in the rtum er 2 engine. This evidence in
combination with the condition ot the propeller blades indicated that the numbers
3 and 4 engines were operating and delivering power to their propellers until
impact with the ground. The condition of the engine compressor sections of engine
numbers 1 and 2 indicated that while the engines were operating, the engines
sustained a power loss, related to oilkar accumulation in the compressors and air
bleed vaives, before impact.
To resolve further the ability of the numbers 1 and 2 engines to produce power,
the number 2 engine power section was tested at the Allison Gas Turbine Division
(of the General Motors Corporation), Indianapolis, Indiana. The examination of the
engine before the test revealed a tar-like substance coating the comwessor gas
path and on various external engine surfaces in addition to the air bleed valves.
Damage to several components required their replacement in order to accomplish
thetsts. Thus, the 5-4 biedm anifold and seat. two fittiRCJ5. and one bleed system
hose were replaced.
In one xes, all of the bleed valves were repfaced with functional valves. It was
subsequently found that the replacemenx 5-1 valve did not actuate properly
because of a plugged high pressure bleed hose. The tar-coated 5-1 bleed vatve
operated when tested. The tar-rsated 5-4 valve would not open properly but could
not be tested because of apparent impact damage. With functional bleed vatves
instatled, the engine produced 88 percent of rated power at the take-off power
point (a 12 percent loss), Over 20 percent toss in surge line, 9.6 percent loss in
airffow. and 5.5 percent loss in compressor efficiency. These tea results indicated
that the number 2 engine was incapable of delivering normal power at the tit?e of
the accident.
A compressor wash using B & B 3100 cleaner (prescribed for the A!lison 501-DZZA
engine) was only slightly effective in restoring power. Walnut shell cleaning
resulted in substantially improved engine performance. After such cleaning, the
engine exhibited 100 percent of rated power at the take-off power point.
restoration of over half of the surge line deterioration, airflow within 2.4 percent of
a normal production unit, and the compressor efficiency was within 1.3 percent of
normal.

6
Sound Spectrum Examination
An examination of the sounds recorded by the CVR cockpit area microphone
allowed the Safety Board to document engine sound frequencies and to calculate
associated engine speed in revolutions per minute (rpm). The sounds docurnented
could not be positively attributed to specific engines using the sound spectrum
information alone; but in combination with other information, conclusions specific
to some of the engines were substantiated.
The sound spectrum indicated normd operation of all engines in the seconds
befere to*lchdowno n the runway. After touchdown, during the time when the go-
around was being initiated. the sound frequency plot indicated that two engines
decelerated about 40 percent rpm while the other engines continued to operate at
the engine's normal goveroed operating speed of 100 percent.
It was noted that the recording speed of the CVR initiaily slowed during the
reduction in engine speed described above and that electrical power to the CVR was
interrupted briefly, indicating a transfer of electrical power from the number 2
engine-driven generator (which powers the CVR) to a generator driven by another
engine. The recordin speed of the CVR returned to normal immediately after ?he
electrical power trans3er.
The recording speed of the CVR is dependent on the frequency of its input
voltage. Therefore, when it was established that the recording speed of the CVR
returned to norrnai after the electrical transfer, it was concluded that the CVR had
been transferred to an engine-driven generator still operating at or near
100percent. Only one electrical power interruption was indicated by the CVR
recording. With the electrical power distribution of the airplane, electrical power
would have been initially transferred to an electrical bus powered by the number 1
enginedriven generator (fol!owing a loss of power from the number 2 engine-
driven generator), unless that generator was operating at a speed lowe: than its
generator cutoff speed (9U percent). In the event of a loss of electrical power from
the numbers 1 md 2 mgine-driven generators, the electrical power to the CVR
would have come from an eiectrical bus powered by the number 3 engine-driven
generator. Since there was only one electrical bus transfer and there was other
evidence of a loss of power involving the number 1 engine, it was concluded that
:he power loss involving the number 1 engine preceded or occurred sirnuitaneously
with ?Re loss of power from engine number 2. and the number 3 engine-driven
Ir
generator assumed the electrical load of the CVR. The sound frequenc plots
showed that at least the number 3 engine and probably number 4 operate In the
100 percent rpm range after the electrical transfer and until the end of the
recording.
Aircraft Performance
x - .
The landing o around performance of the accident airplane was examined to
determine whet er It was consistent with the predicted performance of an L-382
either with a loss of power from the number 2 engine alone or with a loss of power
from engiqes 1 and 2 in combination. The airplane gross weight at impact was
about 83,541 pounds. The Safety Board found that the airplane was loaded in
accordance with the applicable weight and center of gravity limitations. Stall
speeds (1 G) for the C-382 with flaps fuiljr extended and with flaps retracted are
78 knots and 35 knots, respectively. The Airpiane Flight Manual contained three-
engine air ninimum controi speed (Vmca) data. In this case, Vmca data, assumes

7
maximum permissible ponver on al) operating engines, the inoperative engine's
propeller windrniliing, full rcdder deflection, 5"of bank away from the inoperative
engine, gear down, and flaps at 50 percent. The appiicable three-engine Wmca
assumes a loss of power from the most critical engine (number 1). With the loss of
the number 7 engine and the environmental circwmtances of the accident, Vmca
would have been about 103 knots. A loss of pcwer from the number 2 engine alone
wouid have been significantly less critical because sf the reduced asymmetry of
thrust in that condition. Under those circumstances directional control could have
been maintained at the airplane's stall speed and Vmca would thus not have been a
factor.
The failure of one of the airplane's four engines is not normally considered to be
critical from the standpoint of continued safe operation. However, the failure of a
second engine would present a substantially more significant problem, particularly
when the two inoperative engines were on the same side. The yawing moment
caused by the most adverse thrust asymmetry, occurring when the two operatin
engines are at high power, is significantly higher than the yawing moment wit8
only one engine inoperative. Consequently, the aerodynamic force required for the
airplane's rudder PO prevent an uncontrollable yaw is greater. That force is a
function of airspeed and rudder deflection.
The force rre quired to deflect the rudder against airloadr on the L-382 airplane is
boosted by h draulic system pressure. Under normal circtmstances for landin2 s',
that is with laps extended beyond the 15 percent (flap handk) position, t e
independent utility and booaer kydradic systems supply 3,000 pounds per square
inch (psi) operatin pressure to separate halves of a tandem actuating cylinder that
positions the ruder. When either of these hydrau!ic systems is inoperative. for
example, with the compjete frss of both engines or engine-driven hydratrlic pumps)
on one wing, the force awailabte to deflect the rudder is halved. Further, when the
wing flap handle is placed in a position !ess than 15 percent extended, the operating
pressure of both systems at the rudder boost actuator is reduced from 3,000 to
1.300 psi. Therefore, under circumstances when both engines cn one wing are
inoperative and the flap handle is raised, the force avaiiable from the rudder boost
actuator is rxuced to approximately 21 percent of the force awailabie during
normal operation.
The combined effect sf the yawing moment and the reduced rudder boost
actuator force rmAt in a significanttty higher Vmca. The airplane manufacturer
calculated that the appiicabte Vmca could be as high as 777 KIA5 under conditions
wherein the numbers 1 ana 2 engines were inoperative (with the uti!ity hydraulic
system depressurized). the number 1 propeller was windmilling. the number 2
propeller feathered. and the flap handle was in the retracted position.
The airplane's flaps receive hydrau!ic pressure from the utility hydraulie system
x
and the utilit hydraulic system receives pressu:e from the number 1 and 2
engine-driven ydraufic pumps. The flapscannot be extended hydraulically without
utility system pressure, but they can &e extended manually using an emergency
procedure and a handcrank. The handcrank is not Iccated in ?he cockpit and
requires about 650 turns for full travel of the flaps. Since the CVR revealed no
conversation re arding use of the manuai flap extensionlretradion system and little
time was availa% le to i.mplem ent the procedure, the Safety Board concluded that
the procedure was not used.

8
Normally, fuil flap extension or retraction by the hydraulic system requires 10 to
13 seconds. The f!aps are driven to their extended positions by mechanicat drive
screw assemblies and are held in position by spring-!oaded flap brakes; thus, loss of
hydraulic pressure would not allow flap positions to be altered by air loads. Since a
crewmember calkd, "Flaps t ~ pa~n"d ?he flap handle was found near the up position
and other evidence that indicated that the fiaps were in an intermediate position. it
was concluded that there was auffiaerct Jtility system hydraulic pressure to release
the flap brakes.
Crew Decisions
Examination of the cockpit converQtion revealed that the captain had been
concerned beioee toltchdawn that the pitch attitude established by the first officer
was incorrect for iandin One second before touchdown, the captain advised his
Ftcrdent to start raisin% tze nose. The FDR documented a pobttiwe G spike to 1.45 at
touchdown followed y a reduction in G loading to a value beit;-;.s 1. G. The captain
assumed controt, and according to FBR data and CVR conversation, the captain
rapidly advanced the throttles and corrected a high nose-up pitch attitude as he
initiated the go-around.
The evidence indicates that the number 1 and 2 engines both fa:led to respond
normally, and io fact. dece1e:atecd about 40 percent following throttle advancement
at the commencement sf the go-around. Despite the power loss, it is likely, at
60 percent rpm, that at least one of the two engines was producing sufficient power
to maintain hydraulic pressure on the utility system, aibeit at some possihie
reduction in avaiiabie pressure versus flow rate. f i b ,a t the commencement af the
go-around, it is likely that the flap handle remained in an extended position.
eonsistent with the 100 percent flap pusition releaed for landing. Thus. fut!
(3,000 psi) h draulic press .et o the rudder booster actuator was probabBy available
ky
initially, an the vawing moment produced by the asymmetry of thrust (with partial
thrust from number 1 and 2 engines and fuil thrust from number 3 and 4 engines)
was probabty initially controllab!e with rudder deflection.
However, 13 seconds after the captain assumed control, a crewmember Mid.
"Flaps up." Apparently in response, the flap handle was raised ana flap retraction
began. The flaps did not retract cornpleteSi t but reached the 35 percent extended
position which is an indication that utility ydraulic system pressure probably was
available in the last seconds of the flight. The action of retracting the flaps
produced two adverse effects which probably resulted in an inability of the crew to
retain directional control of the airplane: (I) the movement of the flap handle to
the retracted position would have reduced rudder boost actuator pressure from
3,000 to 1,300 psi; and (2) the demand for uti!ity system hydraulic flow to the flap
system might have resulted in a s8i n ificaot reduction of pressure in that system. The
conseqoence of thir action woul have been a reduction in available rudder force,
and a sudden decrease En rudder deflection (despite the effgrtssf thz crew). Under
these conditions Qmca was significantly higher than the actual air speed and the
airplane began an uncon:rollable yaw to the left. The immediate increase of
aerodynamic drag fu6her aggravated th2 controllability probiem to preclude the
possibility of recovery in the go-around.
Tie Safety Soard does not fault the captain's initial decision to commence the
go-around when he hecame aware that the airplane was not in a position to
properly continue the landing. However, soon after the captain advanced the
throttles, he should have ~ C Q ~ TaWw are of the asymmetrical 'thrust condition. This

-
awareness should have been reinforced by crewmember comments, the sounds of
the engines winding down, and the rhanges in engine instrument indications. The
captain had substantia! wamin that the airpfane was experiencing a olss of power
from at least one engine, but 8 a t information did not become apparent unti! the
go-around had been commenced. After the go-around was commenced, it i5
apparent that the captain either did not reeegnize promptly that power had been
lost from two engines or that the loss of power would potentially render the
airp!ane uncontrollable atthespeed a : which the go-around was commenced.
In retrospect, it is clear that the best decision a? that time would have been ta
refand the airplane. However, the captain wasableto maintain runway heading for
about 10 seconds, and hirdecision to continice may have been influenced initially by
the absence of an apparent control problem. Also, the pitot may have been able to
control the airplane. depending on the d2 r ee of engine power available. were it
not for the decision to raise the flap han le to the retracted position, a decision
which was contrary to engine inoperative emergeney procedures. The Safety Board
beiiwes that the loss Qf dieoaIonai control began before the command to raise the
flaps. but was aggravated b the movement of the flap handle which reduced
(r
Y.e n h ydraulic p:essure an rudder effectiveness. The decision to raise the flaps
urlng the go-around was not only incorrect but it contributed to the cause of the
accident by rendering the airpiane uncontrol!able.
In that the captain continued the go-around until control was lost rather than
attempting to reland at the firsf indication that heading and roll control could not
be maintained, the jafety Board also beiieL=s that the captain's decision
contributed to the consequences of the accident. Apparently. the captain did not
recognize that the loss of power experienced by the 3irpiane would rende: the
&mane uncontrollable at the speed at which the go-around was commencd. The
Safety hard believes that his continuing the go-around after receiving cues
associated with a loss of power from one or more engines mu5t have been
infiuencd by a conviction that the airplane could be flown out of its precarious
&cum-nce.
Ensine Maintenance
A detailed inspection of the a~dailablea irplane maintenance records was
eonducted to resolve the source of tire turbo-engine oil residues observed on the
horizontal surfaces aft of :he nut;-&r 2 engine and the source of the tar-like
residues found in the compressor gas path of the number 2 engine and on the air
bleed valves of three engines. The maintenance records indicated that the required
scheduled maintenance checks ana inspections were accomplished OR time. All
appiieab!e airworthiness directives and service instructions had been accomplished.
The airplane was manufactured in 1974 and had beer: operated 17,026 hours and
8,146 cycles. All of the engines had been operated in excess of S,C00 hours since
overhaul. The most recent engine change (number 1) occurred on March 26,1987.
However, the engines and propellers had a recent histmy of oil leaks. The
n u m b 2 engine P ropeller was changed on April 3, 1987, 5 days before the
accident Some o the recent reports and actions indicating oil .usage or leaks
foilww:
-
March 12 #3 prop oil !ow; added 1 quart.
March 30 - X2 prop oil light came on; added 1 quart.

10
-
March .3i Check #2 prop oil and service, oil light on; serviced prop
with 1 quafioil.
-
April' 1 Engine 81 oil low; added 6 8 uarts. Engine X2 oil low;.
added 4 quark: #3 engine oil low; ad ed 3 quarts. #4 engine oil
low; added 4 quarts.
-
April 3 X1 prop oil.liP htcame on in flight, continued,o.perationf or
..
1. S hours with prop oi iight on. Serviced prop, 1 quart low; serviced
engine. 3 quarts low. . .
, .
s
-
April #l prop oil Sight came on in flight, flew aircraft with prop
.
, ..
low light on 2 hours; Replaced #I pump hou.sing and valve
assembly.
Allison and SAT Maintenance Manuals contained a procedure for nonrouoine
deaning of the.enginesu sinig a liquid,cleaneri n the event of propeller or engine 03
leaks. The SAT procedure required the washing of engine compressors "anytirite-
visible contamination exists, after exposure to prop oil, or compressor
contamination is suspected:' There was no company procedure for routine
compressor.cleaning. Although there were several reports and indications of,
propetkr and engine oil leaksinvolving N517SJ in the Wday period preceding.the . ..
acddent;thwe was no record that SAT cleaned the compressors of the engines on
N51751 foliowing any of the incidents
An SAT mechanic who inspected the airplane before the April 8, ,1987 flights,
reported th& he did not observe .any visible contamination of the engines that
wodd have required engine cleaniny. AI?, recent Right engineer logs fdr tffe
airplane -prwideda record of. norma tUrbJne Inlet temperatures, n d eng ine
torque. indications, normal fuel flow, and normal rated power.indicationst hrough
April 3, 1987. (flight en' ineer records were not avaifabie beyond April '3.) These
records and the Aprit.8 inspection indicated to the. Safety Board. that' any
deterioration in the condition of the engines was not readily apparent byexternal'
inspection or by the performance of the engines .at least unt? 5 days b,efore the
accident. Thus, it wa$ indicated that the accumutatior! of oil residues withimthe
enginecompressorshad only begun to degrade engine performance in the fast few
days before the accident 'Ift he SAT.mechanic's prefiight.evakuationo f the engines
was con&, then.thefe would be' r@aforit o conclude that substantial propelkr 6 Y
engine oil leakax occywed. &ring the accident flight. Howwer; the nature of the
residues within e engines indicated tong term contamination.
. . .
-Whifet he maintenance records did not suggest a specific s o k e of an oif leak :
',
that might have occurred on the accident ftight, the records did indicate that there
had beenman leopp-ortunitiertor emove potentially damaging oil residuesfrm
. .
the engines f towing otl leakage on other recent flights. The Safety Board believes. :
that the failure.o f.S AT maintenance to clean the engine compressors fatlowing oil
leaks in the months before the accident allowed.the accumulation of oil residues in
the enginei and made. the"engines susceptible to rerated .performance problems.
Consequently, these maintenance omissions are considered to have been a.cac~soe f.
.
'
theaccident-
.
. . . .
. . . .
. . i .. .. . . . , . . . . . . .. . :.. . , . . . .. . . . . .. . . ...

The Safety Beard believes that the performance ob the number 2 engine during
its testing in Indianapolis was indicative of the performance problems experienced
by both the numbers 1 and 2 engines on the accident flight. Secause of thae
components that had to be replaced during the testin3 , the test results, aithou h
unacceptable for an in-service engine. prabably excee ed the performance of t e
engine immediateiy before the accident. Although the examination and testing of
the engine did not revea! the exact source of an oil ieak on the accident flight, the
t&ng did show conclusivcfJ .h ow accumulated oil residues in the compressors of
turbopropeller engines coui impede the performance of the engine and propeller
in response to rapid throttle movement. The testing did not substantiate whether it
was engine oil or propeiles oil or a combination of oils that was responsible for the
accumulation sf oil residues that impeded ent i ne performance. In that the
propellers are designed to provide airflow throug the engine inlet, it is concluded
that either prspelkr or engine oil leakage had the potential to cause the
degradation of performance indicated in the numbers 1 and 2 engines. Either could
have introduced the oil that accumulated with!:, and impeded the performance of
the number 1 an4 2 engines. The Safety Board believes that the lack of power
section response from the number 1 and 2 engines was directly attributable to the
accumulated oii residues in the dirty compressors and air bieed valves. This
condition rendered the engines unable to respond to or recover from rapid throttle
movement and the jnabiiity of the power sections to provide the power needed to
support normal propeller Made angle mechanical scheduling. As a result, the
number 1 and 2 engine rotor speeds decreased causing substantta! thrust
asymmetry and increased Umca.
