Ground Fire Aboard Cargo Airplane
ABX Air Flight 1611
Boeing 767‐200, N799AX
San Francisco, California
June 28, 2008
Aircraft Accident Summary Report
NTSB/AAR-09/04/SUM
PB2009-910404
National
Transportation
Safety Board

this page intentionally left blank

ERRATA
THE CORRECTIONS BELOW ARE INCLUDED
IN THIS REVISED VERSION OF THE DOCUMENT
AIRCRAFT ACCIDENT SUMMARY REPORT
NTSB/AAR-09-04/SUM (PB2009-910404)
GROUND FIRE ABOARD CARGO AIRPLANE, ABX AIR FLIGHT 1611,
BOEING 767-200, N799AX, SAN FRANCISCO, CALIFORNIA, JUNE 28, 2008
• Page i has been changed to indicate that appendix B presents comments from the State of Israel, Ministry of
Transport, Aviation Incidents and Accidents Investigation. (July 21, 2009)
The report originally stated that appendix B presented comments from the Civil Aviation Authority of Israel
(CAA Israel).
• Page iv has been changed to indicate that 11 safety recommendations were issued to the Federal Aviation
Administration (FAA). (July 21, 2009)
The report originally stated that 12 safety recommendations had been issued to the FAA.
• Page 17, footnote 34, has been changed to indicate that the State of Israel, Ministry of Transport, Aviation
Incidents and Accidents Investigation, participated in this investigation and provided comments. (July 21,
2009)
The report originally stated that CAA Israel had participated in the investigation.
• Page 61 has been changed to indicate that comments were received from the State of Israel, Ministry of
Transport, Aviation Incidents and Accidents Investigation. (July 21, 2009)
The report originally stated that comments had been received from CAA Israel.

this page intentionally left blank

NTSB/AAR-09/04/SUM
PB2009-910404
Notation 8116
Adopted June 30, 2009
Aircraft Accident Summary Report
Ground Fire Aboard Cargo Airplane
ABX Air Flight 1611
Boeing 767-200, N799AX
San Francisco, California
June 28, 2008
National
Transportation
Safety Board
490 L’Enfant Plaza, S.W.
Washington, D.C. 20594

National Transportation Safety Board. 2009. Ground Fire Aboard Cargo Airplane, ABX Air
Flight 1611, Boeing 767-200, N799AX, San Francisco, California, June 28, 2008. Aircraft Accident
Summary Report NTSB/AAR-09/04/SUM. Washington, DC.
Abstract: This report explains the June 28, 2008, accident involving a Boeing 767-200, N799AX,
operated by ABX Air as a cargo flight. The airplane experienced a ground fire before engine startup. The
captain and the first officer evacuated the airplane through the cockpit windows and were not injured, and
the airplane was substantially damaged. The safety issues discussed in this report involve the conductivity
and the aging of oxygen hoses, the FAA’s airworthiness directive process, the proximity of oxygen
system components to electrical wiring, the electrical grounding of oxygen systems, the potential for
passenger reading lights on transport-category airplanes to become an ignition source, additional smoke
detector systems for cargo airplanes, and the effectiveness of ABX Air’s continuing analysis and
surveillance program. Safety recommendations regarding these issues are addressed to the Federal
Aviation Administration and to ABX Air.
The National Transportation Safety Board is an independent Federal agency dedicated to promoting aviation,
railroad, highway, marine, pipeline, and hazardous materials safety. Established in 1967, the agency is mandated by
Congress through the Independent Safety Board Act of 1974 to investigate transportation accidents, determine the
probable causes of the accidents, issue safety recommendations, study transportation safety issues, and evaluate the
safety effectiveness of government agencies involved in transportation. The Safety Board makes public its actions
and decisions through accident reports, safety studies, special investigation reports, safety recommendations, and
statistical reviews.
Recent publications are available in their entirety on the Internet at <http://www.ntsb.gov>. Other information about
available publications also may be obtained from the website or by contacting:
National Transportation Safety Board
Records Management Division, CIO-40
490 L’Enfant Plaza, SW
Washington, DC 20594
(800) 877-6799 or (202) 314-6551
Safety Board publications may be purchased, by individual copy or by subscription, from the National Technical
Information Service. To purchase this publication, order report number PB2009-910404 from:
National Technical Information Service
5285 Port Royal Road
Springfield, Virginia 22161
(800) 553-6847 or (703) 605-6000
The Independent Safety Board Act, as codified at 49 U.S.C. Section 1154(b), precludes the admission into evidence
or use of Board reports related to an incident or accident in a civil action for damages resulting from a matter
mentioned in the report.

NTSB Aircraft Accident Summary Report
Contents
Figures ............................................................................................................................................ ii
Abbreviations and Acronyms ..................................................................................................... iii
Executive Summary ..................................................................................................................... iv
1. The Accident .............................................................................................................................1
1.1 History of the Flight ..........................................................................................................1
1.2 Fire Damage to Airplane ...................................................................................................4
2. Investigation and Analysis ......................................................................................................6
2.1 Fire Initiation ....................................................................................................................6
2.2 Oxygen System Leaks .....................................................................................................11
2.3 Emergency Response ......................................................................................................12
3. Safety Issues ............................................................................................................................15
3.1 Conductivity of Oxygen Hoses .......................................................................................15
3.2 Airworthiness Directive Process .....................................................................................16
3.3 Proximity of Oxygen System Components to Electrical Wiring ....................................18
3.4 Electrical Grounding of Oxygen System ........................................................................20
3.5 Aging Oxygen Hoses ......................................................................................................21
3.6 Potential for Reading Lights to Become Ignition Source ...............................................22
3.7 Smoke Detection System ................................................................................................23
3.8 ABX Air’s Continuing Analysis and Surveillance Program ..........................................24
4. Conclusions .............................................................................................................................27
4.1 Findings...........................................................................................................................27
4.2 Probable Cause................................................................................................................28
5. Recommendations ..................................................................................................................29
5.1 New Recommendations ..................................................................................................29
5.2 Previously Issued Recommendation Reiterated in This Report .....................................30
6. Appendixes..............................................................................................................................32
Appendix A: Cockpit Voice Recorder .....................................................................................32
Appendix B: Comments from the State of Israel, Ministry of Transport, Aviation Incidents
and Accidents Investigation .....................................................................................................61
i

NTSB Aircraft Accident Summary Report
Figures
Figure 1. Cockpit and Forward Cabin of Airplane ........................................................................ 2
Figure 2. Fire Damage to Top of Airplane ..................................................................................... 4
Figure 3. Oxygen System Components in Supernumerary Compartment ..................................... 7
Figure 4. Stainless Steel Coil Spring Within Flexible Oxygen Hose ............................................ 8
Figure 5. Proximity of Electrical Wiring to Oxygen System Tubing .......................................... 10
ii

NTSB Aircraft Accident Summary Report
Abbreviations and Acronyms
AC advisory circular
AD airworthiness directive
ARFF aircraft rescue and firefighting
CAA Civil Aviation Authority of Israel
CAMP continuous airworthiness maintenance program
CASP continuing analysis and surveillance program
CFR Code of Federal Regulations
CVR cockpit voice recorder
FAA Federal Aviation Administration
HRET high-reach extendable turret
IAI Israel Aerospace Industries
NTSB National Transportation Safety Board
psig pounds per square inch gauge
PMI principal maintenance inspector
PSU passenger service unit
PVC polyvinyl chloride
SB service bulletin
SFO San Francisco International Airport
SPN skin-penetrating nozzle
TSB Transportation Safety Board of Canada
iii

NTSB Aircraft Accident Summary Report
Executive Summary
On June 28, 2008, about 2215 Pacific daylight time, an ABX Air Boeing 767-200,
N799AX, operating as flight 1611 from San Francisco International Airport, San Francisco,
California, experienced a ground fire before engine startup. The captain and the first officer
evacuated the airplane through the cockpit windows and were not injured, and the airplane was
substantially damaged. The cargo flight was operating under the provisions of 14 Code of
Federal Regulations Part 121. At the time of the fire, the airplane was parked near a loading
facility, all of the cargo to be transported on the flight had been loaded, and the doors had been
shut.
The National Transportation Safety Board determines that the probable cause of this
accident was the design of the supplemental oxygen system hoses and the lack of positive
separation between electrical wiring and electrically conductive oxygen system components. The
lack of positive separation allowed a short circuit to breach a combustible oxygen hose, release
oxygen, and initiate a fire in the supernumerary compartment that rapidly spread to other areas.
Contributing to this accident was the Federal Aviation Administration’s (FAA) failure to require
the installation of nonconductive oxygen hoses after the safety issue concerning conductive
hoses was initially identified by Boeing.
The safety issues discussed in this report involve the conductivity and the aging of
oxygen hoses, the FAA’s airworthiness directive process, the proximity of oxygen system
components to electrical wiring, the electrical grounding of oxygen systems, the potential for
passenger reading lights on transport-category airplanes to become an ignition source, additional
smoke detector systems for cargo airplanes, and the effectiveness of ABX Air’s continuing
analysis and surveillance program. Eleven new safety recommendations to the FAA and one to
ABX Air are included in the report.
iv

NTSB Aircraft Accident Summary Report
1. The Accident
1.1 History of the Flight
On June 28, 2008, about 2215 Pacific daylight time,1 an ABX Air Boeing 767-200,
N799AX, operating as flight 1611 from San Francisco International Airport (SFO),
San Francisco, California, experienced a ground fire before engine startup. The captain and the
first officer evacuated the airplane through the cockpit windows and were not injured, and the
airplane was substantially damaged. The cargo flight was operating under the provisions of
14 Code of Federal Regulations (CFR) Part 121. At the time of the fire, the airplane was parked
near a loading facility, all of the cargo to be transported on the flight had been loaded, and the
doors had been shut.2
The fire was located in the supernumerary compartment of the airplane. This
compartment, which is present on some cargo airplanes, is located directly aft of the cockpit and
forward of the main deck cargo compartment, as shown in figure 1.3 This area is where the
lavatory, galley, and three non-flight crew seats (in a bench configuration) are located.4
Flight 1611 was scheduled to depart SFO at 2230 for Airborne Airpark, Wilmington,
Ohio. Earlier that day, maintenance personnel performed a service check of the airplane, which
included a check of the supplemental oxygen system pressure. The supplemental oxygen system,
which provided emergency oxygen, was supplied by two oxygen bottles located below the
cockpit. During a postaccident interview, a mechanic reported that the supernumerary oxygen
bottle, which also provided emergency oxygen to the cockpit, had a pressure between about
1 All times in this report are Pacific daylight time based on a 24-hour clock.
2 The NTSB’s public docket for this accident investigation is available at <http://www.ntsb.gov/info/foia_fri-
dockets.htm>.
3 Some cargo airplanes have a similar area that is not specifically referred to as a supernumerary compartment
by their operator.
4 Occupants of the supernumerary seats are nonrevenue passengers, including airline employees and individuals
who are specifically associated with the cargo aboard a flight. No one was occupying the seats at the time of the
accident.
1

NTSB Aircraft Accident Summary Report
1,220 and 1,230 pounds per square inch gauge (psig)5 and that the cockpit bottle had a pressure
of about 1,560 psig.6
Figure 1. Cockpit and Forward Cabin of Airplane
The flight crew conducted preflight checks, including one for the supplemental oxygen
system in the cockpit. The captain stated that he pushed the oxygen switch, tested his oxygen
mask, and verified oxygen pressure using the engine indicating and crew alerting system. The
captain reported that oxygen was flowing during the test and had stopped once the test was
5 The oxygen system had a nominal pressure of 1,850 psig, and service check cards indicated that the system
was to be serviced when pressure was below 1,300 psig. A mechanic performing the service check stated that he did
not service the supernumerary oxygen bottle at that time because he knew that he would be rechecking the pressure
during the predeparture check of the airplane. The mechanic also stated that, during the predeparture check, the
supernumerary oxygen bottle pressure was still between about 1,220 and 1,230 psig, so he removed the bottle from
the airplane but then reinstalled it after determining that no additional oxygen could be added to the bottle. (This
issue is discussed further in section 2.2.) The mechanic indicated that an oxygen bottle would be placed on the
minimum equipment list if its pressure were below 1,100 psig.
6 The postaccident interview with the mechanic occurred about 1 month after the accident. However, on the day
after the accident, the mechanic told the National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB) that the pressure to the
supernumerary oxygen bottle was about 1,580 psig and that the pressure to the cockpit bottle was about 1,700 psig.
(During its examination of the airplane wreckage, NTSB investigators found that the cockpit bottle had a pressure of
1,700 psig and that the supernumerary bottle was empty.)
2

NTSB Aircraft Accident Summary Report
completed and that the system check was normal. According to the cockpit voice recorder (CVR)
recording,7 a sound similar to an oxygen mask test and the first officer’s statement “mask check”
were recorded about 2200:07 and 2203:24, respectively.8
The pilots reported that, while performing the engine start checklist, they heard loud
“pop” and “hissing” sounds. (The initiation of these sounds was not audible on the CVR
recording.) According to the CVR, between about 2210:28 and 2210:41, the first officer stated,
“hey, there’s something going on in the back … we got a fire … got a big fire.” The cockpit area
microphones then recorded sounds similar to the lavatory smoke detector alarm and a fire
warning bell.
The first officer reported that he had been in the supernumerary compartment turning off
lights (except for possibly the galley light) less than 1 minute before hearing the pop and hissing
sounds. (Although the first officer estimated that he had been in the supernumerary compartment
less than 1 minute before hearing the sounds, the CVR recorded the sound of the cockpit door
closing about 2207:32.) He indicated that no smoke or fire was visible at that time. He also
reported that about 15 seconds had elapsed between the time that he heard the sounds and the
time that he got out of his cockpit seat, opened the cockpit door, and looked inside the
supernumerary compartment. (The CVR recorded the sound of the cockpit door closing about
2210:41. While the door was open, the hissing sound could be heard on the CVR.) The first
officer further reported that the location where he first noticed smoke and fire was near the
compartment ceiling and at the right end (his left) of an enclosure that contained components of
the supernumerary supplemental oxygen system. The captain did not observe the fire but
indicated that he could smell the smoke.
About 2211:04, the first officer contacted the ground controller to inform him that aircraft
rescue and firefighting (ARFF) was needed because of a cargo fire. The controller then
confirmed that the first officer was reporting an aircraft fire and stated, about 2211:24, “we’re
gonna roll the trucks right now.” Afterward, the pilots began the fire and evacuation checklist.
The CVR recording ended about 2211:38.
The exit doors that were normally available to the flight crew were an entry door on the
left side of the supernumerary compartment (L1) and a service door on the right side of the
compartment (R1). Because of the location and the intensity of the fire, the flight crew had to
evacuate the airplane through the two cockpit window exits. Each window had an escape rope,
and the first officer exited the airplane using the escape rope at his window. Afterward, the first
officer instructed ground personnel to move the stairs under the captain’s window. The captain
then opened his window and climbed onto the stairs to exit the cockpit.
The captain and the first officer stated that they observed black smoke “pouring” out of
the airplane. Information on the emergency response appears in section 2.3.
7 The airplane was also equipped with a flight data recorder, but it was not recording at the time because the
engines had not yet been started.
8 The CVR transcript appears in appendix A.
3

NTSB Aircraft Accident Summary Report
1.2 Fire Damage to Airplane
In the cockpit, the ceiling and other surfaces were covered with soot. Extensive thermal
damage was also present on the cockpit ceiling, especially in the aft portion. The bulkhead
separating the cockpit and the supernumerary compartment was damaged by fire and had burn-
through areas, especially in the upper portions of the bulkhead. Flight control cables to the tail
were routed vertically along the aft side of this bulkhead, and their upper mounting point had
fallen to the floor structure.
In the supernumerary compartment, the fire completely consumed the seat cushions and
most of the seat structure; only small portions of the seat frame remained. The floor beneath the
seats was fire damaged. The fire consumed most of the ceiling panels, and charred ceiling portions
were found on the floor. Large burn-through areas were located to the left and the right of the
crown centerline, and a smaller burn-through area was located on the skin above the lavatory. Two
smaller burn-through holes were also found in the crown centerline. All of these burn-through
areas were visible from outside the airplane, as shown in figure 2. Recovered electrical wiring from
above the supernumerary compartment ceiling panels was found on the floor.
Figure 2. Fire Damage to Top of Airplane
The L1 and R1 doors were extensively fire damaged. The operating mechanism for the
L1 door and the tracks for both doors, which allowed them to be opened upward and inward, had
melted away, causing the doors to be inoperable. The door leading from the supernumerary
compartment to the cockpit showed heavy soot in most areas but was not compromised by the
4

NTSB Aircraft Accident Summary Report
fire. The lavatory (on the left side of the supernumerary compartment) sustained heavy fire
damage. Most of the walls in the galley area (on the right side of the supernumerary
compartment) were charred and covered with heavy soot. The left-most galley wall, located next
to the center of the cockpit bulkhead, had buckled and collapsed as a result of fire damage. The
ceiling above the galley area was mostly missing.
The stainless steel supply tubing for the supernumerary supplemental oxygen system was
found intact (except for a portion of the supply tubing that was missing from the location where
the fire had consumed the cockpit bulkhead).9 One of the three aluminum oxygen mask stowage
boxes was found partially consumed. A stainless steel 90° elbow assembly from each stowage
box was recovered, but one of the assemblies was found in two separate pieces. Both of these
pieces exhibited melting. The oxygen hose ends that were recovered from the supply tubing and
elbow assembly were made of aluminum. No evidence of arcing was found on the recovered
portions of the wiring, but an extensive amount of wiring was not found as a result of the fire.
The main deck cargo compartment extended the length of the airplane, from behind the
supernumerary compartment to the aft pressure bulkhead.10 A smoke barrier wall had separated
the supernumerary and cargo compartments. The smoke barrier wall had been constructed with a
lateral center section and aft angled outboard sections. The top edge of the lateral wall was
damaged by the fire and was no longer connected to the upper aft angled section, causing the
lateral section of the wall to collapse into the main deck cargo compartment. (The bottom edge
of the wall remained mostly connected to the floor structure.) Aluminum strips on the lateral
wall, including the one that connected the left and right sections of the wall, had melted away.
Both angled outboard sections were still standing but were charred.
The two forward-most cargo containers, which were closest to the door on the smoke
barrier wall, showed evidence of soot, thermal damage, burn-through, and melting.11 The two
containers located in the position directly aft of the two forward-most cargo containers showed
external thermal damage and soot. The remaining cargo containers showed soot damage only.
ABX Air reported that the substantial damage to the airplane resulted in a hull loss.
9 This missing supply tubing was in an area that had been damaged by fire, firefighting efforts, and the
installation (after the fire) of posts to stabilize the structure above the area of investigation.
10 The main deck cargo compartment was configured so that 19 containers could be loaded. The airplane was
also configured with three lower deck cargo compartments. Access to these lower deck cargo compartments was
provided by doors located in the lower fuselage.
11 The cargo net, which was located directly in front of the two forward-most containers, was missing in some
areas; the remaining sections of the net were heavily charred and had heavy soot deposits present. The cargo liners
along the ceiling above the four forward-most cargo positions were heavily fire damaged and/or mostly missing.
5

NTSB Aircraft Accident Summary Report
2. Investigation and Analysis
2.1 Fire Initiation
The first officer reported that, less than 1 minute before he and the captain heard the pop
and hissing sounds,12 he had been in the supernumerary compartment with no fire or smoke
present at the time. Within 15 seconds after hearing the sounds, the first officer opened the
cockpit door and saw black smoke in the supernumerary compartment at ceiling height; through
the smoke, he saw fire near the ceiling above the top of the right-most occupant seat and above
the location of the weight and balance computer.13
The supernumerary compartment was constructed with low-flammability materials, in
accordance with Federal regulations. The enclosure above the supernumerary occupant seats, the
top right of which was consistent with the location where the first officer initially observed the
fire, included panel material, an aluminum subframe, and three oxygen mask stowage boxes. The
brief time during which the fire developed, the intensity of the fire, and the pop and hissing
noises heard by the flight crew indicated that a source of pressurized oxygen was involved in the
fire. Also, the supernumerary oxygen bottle was found empty (compared with the cockpit
oxygen bottle, which was found almost full), further indicating that the oxygen system supplying
the supernumerary compartment had been compromised.
Each of the three oxygen mask stowage boxes (in the enclosure above the supernumerary
occupant seats) included an oxygen mask assembly, a flexible hose that was primarily made of
polyvinyl chloride (PVC),14 and rigid stainless steel supply tubing, as shown in figure 3. The
manufacturer of the PVC flexible oxygen hoses installed a stainless steel coil spring in the hoses,
as shown in figure 4, to prevent bends from collapsing the hose and disrupting the oxygen
supply. The stainless steel coil was loosely attached to the aluminum fittings at each hose end,
making the hoses electrically conductive.
12 Section 1.1 of this report indicates that about 3 minutes had elapsed between the time that the CVR recorded
the sound of the cockpit door closing and the first officer’s statement, “hey, there’s something going on in the back.”
13 The weight and balance computer was located below the right end of the supernumerary enclosure and to the
right of the supernumerary occupant seats.
14 PVC is a plastic.
6

NTSB Aircraft Accident Summary Report
Figure 3. Oxygen System Components in Supernumerary Compartment
Note: The oxygen system components shown in the figure were not from the accident airplane but were instead from
another 767 airplane in ABX Air’s fleet.
7

NTSB Aircraft Accident Summary Report
Figure 4. Stainless Steel Coil Spring Within Flexible Oxygen Hose
Note: The flexible oxygen hose shown in the figure was not from the accident airplane but was instead from the
NTSB’s oxygen hose tests, as explained in this section.
The National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB) performed tests on PVC flexible
oxygen hose assemblies that had been removed from the accident airplane and other ABX Air
767 airplanes to evaluate whether electrically energized hoses could cause a fire. The hoses were
pressurized with oxygen, and a 120-volt AC electrical current15 was passed through the internal
stainless steel coil spring by attaching electrical conductors to the aluminum fittings at each end
of the hose assemblies, which resulted in the hoses becoming part of an electrical circuit.
Discrete tests at various energy levels evaluated the hose assemblies’ response to becoming
electrically energized. (These energy levels were consistent with those that were available on the
airplane in the areas where the oxygen system components were routed.) At low energy levels,
the heating of the internal spring by the electrical current passing through it (known as resistance
heating) caused the PVC hose material to heat enough to soften and allowed the oxygen pressure
to rupture the hose. At higher energy levels, the internal spring could be heated until it became
an ignition energy source, causing the flexible oxygen hose to ignite and sustain a fire. The time
to failure during the tests ranged from 6 to 180 seconds depending on the amount of energy
supplied to the internal spring.
15 One test was conducted with a 28-volt DC electrical current.
8

NTSB Aircraft Accident Summary Report
Each hose ignition that resulted from heating the internal spring was preceded by a loud
pop sound (similar to that of a firecracker) that resulted from the combustion of the PVC hose
interior wall along with the oxygen within the hose. (The combustion within the hose generated
internal pressure and burst the hose.) The sustained burning of the pressurized flexible hose was
accompanied by a loud hissing sound. When ignition occurred, the fire would progress upstream
toward the source of oxygen. When the ignition took place near the upstream (supply) end of the
flexible hose, the resulting fire would extinguish quickly once it consumed the PVC hose
material upstream of the failure location. When the ignition took place near the downstream end,
the resulting fire would steadily burn until either the oxygen was manually shut off or all of the
PVC hose material was consumed.
Additional tests involved igniting a pressurized PVC flexible oxygen hose with an
external heat source; specifically, a wire was wrapped around the hose, and electrical current was
applied to the wire. These tests demonstrated the ignition and sustained combustion of a
pressurized PVC hose as a result of an external ignition source. During these tests, the oxygen
hose did not ignite with a loud pop sound, but a loud hissing sound was heard, and an intense fire
resulted from the burning of the PVC hose material.
The NTSB concludes that the pop and hissing sounds heard by the flight crew
immediately before the fire was discovered were consistent with the ignition of an oxygen hose
by an internal rather than external heat source. The NTSB further concludes that the design of
the oxygen hose assembly allowed the internal spring to become a source of ignition when it was
electrically energized, the PVC hose material to act as a fuel, and the oxygen within the hose to
promote burning.
In addition, the two portions of a partially melted 90° stainless steel elbow assembly (a
connector tube) were found near the right supernumerary occupant seat. The portions had been
separated by melting that severed the middle of the tube. Also, aluminum fittings were found
attached to the stainless steel fittings at the ends of the two elbow assembly portions. (The
upstream aluminum fitting had been part of the oxygen hose, and the downstream aluminum
fitting had been part of the oxygen mask stowage box assembly.) The aluminum fittings showed
signs of incipient melting (that is, the beginning stages of melting) and slight deformation but
otherwise remained in place, even though the melting temperature of aluminum is less than
one-half of the melting temperature of stainless steel.16 Thus, the elbow assembly melting
occurred in a highly localized manner before the heat could conduct and affect the aluminum
fittings on the ends.17
The only way to cause melting of the stainless steel elbow assembly is an oxygen-fuel
flame because temperatures that are attained in ordinary fires are not sufficient to melt stainless
16 The average melting point of aluminum is 1,200° F, and the average melting point of stainless steel is
2,500° F.
17 When an exemplar elbow assembly was exposed to the burning end of a pressurized oxygen hose, the elbow
did not melt, but the heat-affected zone was concentrated to an area that was about the same size as the melted area
on the portions of the elbow assembly that were recovered from the airplane.
9

NTSB Aircraft Accident Summary Report
steel. The source of oxygen to allow for this melting would have had to be located closely to the
melted stainless steel elbow assembly; thus, the source of oxygen was the flexible oxygen hose
connected to that particular elbow assembly.
During the inspections of other ABX Air 767 airplanes, electrical wiring was found in
contact with or routed near the stainless steel oxygen supply tubing, as shown in figure 5. A short
circuit from this close-contact wiring would be the most likely source to provide electrical
energy to the spring. No direct evidence of a short circuit (that is, no beading on wires or arc
marks on the oxygen supply tubing) was found, but most of the wiring near the supply tubing
and portions of the tubing were missing.
Figure 5. Proximity of Electrical Wiring to Oxygen System Tubing
Note: The wiring and tubing shown in the figure were not from the accident airplane but were instead from another
767 airplane in ABX Air’s fleet.
It is important to note that Boeing had received previous reports of electrical energy
causing leaks in oxygen hoses. Specifically, Boeing had received a report from a 737 operator
(the date of which is unknown) and from a 757 operator (in August 1997) indicating that cockpit
flexible oxygen hoses had developed leaks after an electrical current had shorted and heated the
internal coil spring, causing the PVC hose material to melt and rupture. [Boeing’s and the
Federal Aviation Administration’s (FAA) response to these reports are discussed in section 3.1.]
10

NTSB Aircraft Accident Summary Report
On the basis of these reports, as well as the results of the oxygen hose tests, the pop and hissing
sounds heard by the flight crew, and the lack of highly combustible materials and ignition
sources in the area, the NTSB concludes that the fire aboard the ABX Air airplane most likely
began when a combustible and electrically conductive oxygen hose in the supernumerary
compartment became energized by a short circuit, which caused the hose to ignite and burn
through, and that the release of oxygen from the hose caused adjacent materials to ignite and
burn at an accelerated rate.
The damaged areas in the cockpit and the main deck cargo compartment were the result
of the fire spreading into those areas from the supernumerary compartment. Specifically,
evidence indicated that the fire entered the cockpit from an aft location and worked its way
forward and downward as the bulkhead separating the supernumerary compartment and the
cockpit (along which flight control cables were vertically routed) was consumed. The evidence
also indicated that the fire entered the main deck cargo compartment after the fire melted the
aluminum strips that held together the smoke barrier wall above the supernumerary occupant
seats.
2.2 Oxygen System Leaks
Maintenance records for the accident airplane showed that, between January 2007 and
June 2008, the oxygen system was serviced 50 times for routine maintenance of the oxygen
system and for reported discrepancies. During that time, maintenance personnel found the
following four oxygen leaks:
• On September 27, 2007, a regulator for an oxygen bottle was leaking.18 To
resolve this issue, the regulator was replaced.
• On November 8, 2007, a hose fitting above a supernumerary occupant seat
was leaking. To resolve this issue, the fitting was reset.
• On March 4, 2008, a fitting downstream of a pressure regulator was leaking.
To resolve this issue, the fitting was tightened.
• On June 25, 2008, the adaptor from an oxygen bottle to a regulator was
leaking. To resolve this issue, the adaptor was tightened.
Most of the 50 oxygen services occurred after the airplane’s last C check on July 23,
2007, and maintenance records showed that the oxygen bottles needed frequent refills after that
time. The NTSB was unable to determine from the available evidence whether any maintenance
performed on or near the oxygen system during the C check disturbed the system’s
18 Maintenance records showed that ABX Air did not consistently distinguish between the cockpit and the
supernumerary oxygen bottles as well as which bottle was the top and the bottom one. (The supernumerary bottle
was positioned above the cockpit bottle.) After the accident, ABX Air installed placards on the bottles, and
maintenance personnel were instructed to note the specific bottle that was being serviced.
11

NTSB Aircraft Accident Summary Report
components.19 However, the repetitive servicing of the oxygen system and the amount of oxygen
bottle refills after the C check indicated that the airplane most likely had a chronic oxygen leak,
yet the location of an oxygen system leak was detected in only four system services. In addition,
interviews with some company maintenance personnel indicated that they did not always record
oxygen system servicing in the maintenance logbooks,20 which was not in compliance with
company procedures and further precluded the company from being completely aware of the
maintenance performed on the system. The NTSB concludes that, although no evidence was
found to indicate that previous oxygen system leaks contributed directly to the fire in the
supernumerary compartment, oxygen leaks are a safety hazard because of their potential to
facilitate a fire. ABX Air indicated that, since the time of the accident, oxygen system leaks have
been fully documented, corrected, and tracked. However, ABX Air had a continuing analysis and
surveillance program (CASP) that did not adequately resolve chronic discrepancies, including
oxygen system leaks.21 The company’s CASP is discussed further in section 3.8.
2.3 Emergency Response
According to an emergency response event chronology created by SFO,22 ARFF was
notified of the ground fire about 2212:27, when the ground controller issued an Alert 3.23
Twenty-two ARFF personnel from three airport firehouses responded to the accident, and one
firefighter reported to a staging area where mutual aid firefighters from the city of San Francisco
and San Mateo County responded.
The first ARFF vehicle (Rescue 49) arrived on scene by 2215:14 and was initially
positioned at the nose of the airplane. A firefighter from this vehicle entered the cockpit (using
the stairs that had been positioned at the left cockpit window during the captain’s evacuation of
the airplane), conducted an interior search of the cockpit, and located the fire in the
supernumerary compartment. However, ARFF personnel could not immediately access the fire
19 During the C check, the supplemental oxygen system was tested, and the mask regulators and hoses in the
cockpit and supernumerary compartment were replaced, according to standard operating procedures. Maintenance
records showed that the system check was normal and that no discrepancies resulted from this work. Also during the
C check, galley light electrical wiring was changed, and a galley light modification was subsequently installed in
March 2008. Galley light electrical wiring is run near oxygen system components, but no evidence indicated that
galley light wiring contributed to this accident.
20 One of these instances occurred during the predeparture check of the accident airplane, when a mechanic
removed the supernumerary oxygen supply bottle from the airplane (because the pressure was reportedly between
about 1,220 and 1,230 psig) and then reinstalled it after determining that no additional oxygen could be added to the
bottle. According to the mechanic, the oxygen servicing bottle had the same pressure, so no additional oxygen could
be transferred to the supply bottle. The mechanic stated that he did not enter this discrepancy into the maintenance
logbook because no maintenance was conducted. Besides not entering this pertinent maintenance information, the
mechanic should have checked the servicing bottle to make sure that it had usable oxygen available.
21 Title 14 CFR 121.373 states that each certificate holder is to establish and maintain a system for the
continuing analysis and surveillance of the performance and effectiveness of its inspection and maintenance
programs. ABX Air’s CASP is similar to other air carriers’ continuing analysis and surveillance system programs.
22 CVR transcript and SFO chronology times were not correlated.
23 Alert 3 indicates that an aircraft has been involved in an accident on or near the airport.
12

NTSB Aircraft Accident Summary Report
because they were unable to open the L1 and R1 doors as a result of fire damage to the
mechanisms that allowed the doors to travel upward.
Rescue 49 had a high-reach extendable turret (HRET) with a skin-penetrating nozzle
(SPN). The HRET/SPN was visually positioned by the driver using controls in the cab of the
vehicle.
The driver of Rescue 49 reported that he tried to insert the SPN through the right cockpit
window but that the extinguishing agent had sprayed outside, rather than inside, the airplane. The
firefighter also reported that he was unaware of this situation until other firefighters told him.
Once Rescue 49 was repositioned near the L1 door,24 the driver used the SPN to apply
extinguishing agent onto the fire through the burn-through areas above the supernumerary
compartment. The SFO event chronology indicated that the fire was contained about 2241:04,
about 25 minutes after the first ARFF vehicle had arrived. Once the fire was contained, ARFF
personnel cut a hole in the fuselage and gained entry into the supernumerary compartment. The
fire was extinguished about 2258:03, about 43 minutes after the first ARFF vehicle had arrived.
The NTSB concludes that ARFF personnel extinguished the fire in a timely manner. The NTSB
further concludes that the SPN was an effective tool in extinguishing the fire, especially because
the forward doors were rendered inoperable by the fire and could not be used to gain access to
the fire.
In its report on the February 7, 2006, United Parcel Service flight 1307 accident in
Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, the NTSB stated that ARFF personnel who used the HRET/SPN
during the emergency response experienced problems penetrating the fuselage with the device
and had to reposition the tip of the SPN a few times before successfully piercing the airplane’s
fuselage.25 The NTSB also stated that the FAA and the International Fire Service Training
Association26 had acknowledged the importance of HRET/SPN training but that the FAA’s
Advisory Circular (AC) 150/5210-17A, “Programs for Training of Aircraft Rescue and
Firefighting Personnel,” did not specifically address this training. The NTSB concluded that
some ARFF personnel were not adequately trained on the use of this device, which reduced its
24 Rescue 49 had been repositioned aft near the tail (for undetermined reasons) and then at the L1 door after the
driver was notified by a firefighter that the vehicle was needed at that location.
25 The NTSB’s investigation found that ARFF personnel responding to a runway overrun accident in Teterboro,
New Jersey, experienced similar problems. For more information, see National Transportation Safety Board,
Runway Overrun and Collision, Platinum Jet Management, LLC, Bombardier Challenger CL-600-1A11, N370V,
Teterboro, New Jersey, February 2, 2005, Aircraft Accident Report NTSB/AAR-06/04 (Washington, DC: NTSB,
2006).
26 According to its website, this association identifies needed training materials for the fire service and related
areas and fosters the development and validation of such training materials.
13

NTSB Aircraft Accident Summary Report
effectiveness in fighting interior aircraft fires.27 As a result, on December 17, 2007, the NTSB
issued Safety Recommendation A-07-100, which asked the FAA to do the following:
Provide guidance to aircraft rescue and firefighting personnel on the best training
methods to obtain and maintain proficiency with the high-reach extendable turret
with skin-penetrating nozzle.
On September 8, 2008, the FAA stated that, in July 2008, it had issued a CertAlert28 to all
airport certification and safety inspectors and operators of Part 139 airports. According to the
FAA, the CertAlert highlighted the availability of airport improvement program funding for
training aids that would allow ARFF personnel to practice piercing an aircraft structure with an
HRET/SPN. The FAA also stated that it would revise AC 150/5210-17A to highlight the
importance of this training for ARFF personnel. The FAA expected to complete the revision by
September 30, 2008. On February 4, 2009, the NTSB classified this recommendation “Open—
Acceptable Response” pending the issuance of the revised AC.
The intent of Safety Recommendation A-07-100 was for the FAA to determine the best
methods for ARFF personnel to train and maintain proficiency with the HRET/SPN. The FAA’s
response to this recommendation indicated that the best method would be training that allowed
ARFF personnel to use the SPN to pierce an airplane structure. However, in March 2009, the
FAA indicated that the AC recommending this training might be issued in August 2009, which is
almost 1 year later than initially planned.
The driver of Rescue 49 stated that he received familiarization training on the use of the
HRET/SPN when the vehicle was delivered to SFO (about 14 years before the accident
occurred). He stated that he practiced using the SPN on cars and vans, indicating that the SPN
required “lots of practice.” Although the driver of Rescue 49 had an initial problem using the
SPN, he was then able to successfully use the device to penetrate the fuselage skin near the
burn-through area and extinguish the fire. However, it is important for firefighters to receive
training that will enable them to quickly and successfully use the SPN in an emergency response.
The NTSB concludes the type of training that the driver of Rescue 49 received on the operation
of the HRET/SPN was not sufficient to allow him to successfully insert extinguishing agent into
the cockpit on his initial attempts. The NTSB further concludes that ARFF personnel who are not
sufficiently trained on the HRET/SPN may not be able to use the device effectively when
fighting aircraft fires. Therefore, the NTSB reiterates Safety Recommendation A-07-100.
27 National Transportation Safety Board, Inflight Cargo Fire, United Parcel Service Company Flight 1307,
McDonnell Douglas DC-8-71F, N748UP, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, February 7, 2006, Aircraft Accident Report
NTSB/AAR-07/07 (Washington, DC: NTSB, 2007).
28 According to the FAA’s website, a CertAlert allows the FAA airports safety and operations division to
quickly provide additional guidance on Part 139 certification and related issues to FAA inspectors and staff.
14

NTSB Aircraft Accident Summary Report
3. Safety Issues
3.1 Conductivity of Oxygen Hoses
After receiving reports that electrical energy (in one case, from a short circuit) had caused
leaks in oxygen hoses installed on its airplanes, Boeing changed the design requirement for
flexible hose assemblies and began installing nonconductive hoses on new-production airplanes.
The nonconductive hoses included insulators that were installed between the internal coil spring
and the fitting at each hose end. According to Boeing, the new hoses were designed to help
prevent damage if they were subjected to an electrical current. The first 767 (the accident
airplane model) with the new hose design was delivered in August 1999.
In addition, Boeing issued alert service bulletins (SBs) to operators of its 737, 747, 757,
and 767 airplanes to replace existing oxygen hoses in the cockpit with the new nonconductive
hoses. The SB for the accident airplane model, 767-35A0034, was issued in September 1999.29
However, the FAA did not mandate compliance with the SBs, as discussed further in section 3.2.
Although SB 767-35A0034 was not initially accomplished on the accident airplane,30 after the
accident, ABX Air accomplished the SB on all of its 767 airplanes. In addition, ABX Air
replaced the oxygen hoses in the airplanes’ supernumerary compartment with nonconductive
hoses.
The manufacturer of the flexible oxygen hoses noted that the general hose design was
based on military standards but that the lengths, diameters, and other features were established
by the airplane manufacturer. The hose manufacturer also noted that, in addition to Boeing,
conductive hoses were installed on airplanes manufactured by Bombardier, Douglas, Cessna,
Gulfstream, Hawker, Embraer, and others.31 The NTSB examined the conductive hoses in some
of those airplane models and verified that the hose design was similar to that of Boeing.
The NTSB recognizes the logistical challenge of replacing all of the conductive oxygen
hoses that are currently installed on airplanes. However, Boeing has already made nonconductive
hoses available for its airplanes, and similar action by other airplane manufacturers would help
prevent the circumstances of this accident from recurring. The NTSB’s oxygen system hose tests
demonstrated that the internal coil spring in the flexible hose assembly became an ignition source
when the spring was electrically energized, causing it to heat up, and that the PVC hose material,
29 Boeing SB 737-35A1053, 747-35A2101, and 757-35A0015 were issued for the other affected airplane
models.
30 Even though maintenance records showed that the SB had not been accomplished on the accident airplane,
the NTSB found that three of the four oxygen hoses in the cockpit were the nonconductive hose type.
31 Airbus had used conductive hoses from the same manufacturer but has since changed to a different hose
design that replaces PVC with a material that is less permeable, thus eliminating PVC hose material that could act as
a fuel.
15

NTSB Aircraft Accident Summary Report
when heated by the spring, would generate combustible gases as a result of a process known as
pyrolysis.32 As a result, the NTSB concludes that combustible oxygen hoses with an electrically
nonconductive design would prevent the internal coil spring from becoming electrically
energized, mitigating the possibility that the hoses would melt and ignite. Therefore, the NTSB
recommends that the FAA require operators to replace electrically conductive combustible
oxygen hoses with electrically nonconductive hoses so that the internal hose spring cannot be
energized. Because Boeing continues to stock conductive hoses (they are still a certified part)
and provide them to customers who request the original part number for the hose, and because
other manufacturers may have the same practice, the NTSB further recommends that the FAA
prohibit the use of electrically conductive combustible oxygen hoses unless the conductivity of
the hose is an intentional and approved parameter in the design.
3.2 Airworthiness Directive Process
After manufacturers provide draft SBs to the FAA for approval, the FAA routinely uses
the opportunity to create airworthiness directives (ADs) that require implementation of the SBs
as a means for removing parts from service when those previously approved parts are found to be
no longer airworthy. According to the FAA, ADs are legally enforceable rules to correct an
unsafe condition in an aircraft, engine, propeller, or appliance.33 However, the FAA’s review of
Boeing’s SBs (recommending the replacement of conductive cockpit oxygen hoses with
nonconductive ones) missed the importance of this safety issue for undetermined reasons and
thus did not result in the issuance of ADs.
After the ABX Air accident, the FAA recognized the significance of this safety issue and
began its rulemaking process. In June 2009, the FAA began issuing notices of proposed
rulemaking for ADs that would require the use of nonconductive hoses in the cockpit for each of
the affected Boeing airplane models in production.
Because the intent of an FAA AD and a manufacturer’s SB is frequently the same, many
ADs simply instruct airplane operators to comply with the provisions of a specific SB. As a
result, this instruction would only address specific uses of an unsafe part. For example, the
FAA’s expected ADs on conductive oxygen hoses will only address specific part numbers in
specific applications that Boeing cited in its SBs. However, the expected ADs will not likely
address the same part numbers used in other applications, including a supplemental type
certificate for a postmanufacture modification (as was the case with the accident airplane). Also,
because the FAA planned to issue ADs for Boeing 737, 747, 757, and 767 models only, the ADs
32 According to a guide for fire and explosion investigations by the National Fire Protection Association,
pyrolysis is the chemical decomposition by heat of a compound into one or more other substances. In this case, the
PVC had pyrolized, generating gaseous fuel inside the hose, which, when combined with the oxygen and the heated
internal hose spring, resulted in a fire.
33 According to 14 CFR 1.1, “General Definitions,” an appliance is “any instrument, mechanism, equipment, part,
apparatus, appurtenance, or accessory, including communications equipment, that is used or intended to be used in
operating or controlling an aircraft in flight, is installed in or attached to the aircraft, and is not part of an airframe,
engine, or propeller.”
16

NTSB Aircraft Accident Summary Report
will not address oxygen hoses from the same hose manufacturer that have a similar electrically
conductive design but are used by other airplane manufacturers and may have different part
numbers.
Although Boeing’s SB specified the replacement of the oxygen hoses only in the cockpit,
this accident demonstrates that electrically conductive oxygen hoses in any airplane installation
are a safety hazard. Because the design of the hose originated with a military specification that
could be used by any manufacturer, and this hose manufacturer provides similar hoses to
numerous airplane manufacturers, the problem with conductive hoses is not restricted to Boeing
or even this particular hose manufacturer.
The hoses are examples of a part (that is, appliance) that is used by more than one
airplane manufacturer. If the FAA can determine which airplane models include the part,
multiple ADs can be issued against each of the airplane models at the same time. If the FAA
were uncertain about the specific airplane models that might include the part, the FAA could
then issue an AD citing the part manufacturer or the base model identifier from that
manufacturer. For example, AD 94-06-04, which was an appliance AD issued against oxygen
mask regulators, stated that the mask regulators were “installed on but not limited to” a list of
multiple airplane models. The AD described the general series for the part along with empty
brackets (“EROS series MF10-[ ]-[ ] full face quick donning mask regulators”) to represent the
various part numbers used by the different airplane manufacturers. In either case, the most
effective way for the FAA to have parts that are no longer airworthy removed from service is to
ensure that the AD process coordinates with part manufacturers as well as airplane
manufacturers.
The accident airplane was approved to be converted from a passenger to a cargo
configuration, and Israel Aerospace Industries (IAI) modified the accident airplane in 2004.34
For this modification, IAI used a design that adapted original Boeing-numbered parts,35
including the flexible hoses for the supernumerary supplemental oxygen system.36 Because IAI
is not a Boeing operator, it was not aware of Boeing’s SB regarding the replacement of
conductive oxygen hoses in the cockpit. Even if IAI had been so aware, the SB addressed only
Boeing installations, and the supernumerary compartment had been a postmanufacture design
34 In accordance with the provisions of Annex 13 to the Convention on International Civil Aviation, the State of
Israel, Ministry of Transport, Aviation Incidents and Accidents Investigation, participated in this investigation as the
representative of the State of Design and Manufacture (Aircraft Modification). IAI participated in the investigation
as a technical advisor to Israel’s Aviation Incidents and Accidents Investigation office, as provided in Annex 13.
Comments from Israel’s Aviation Incidents and Accidents Investigation office on a draft of this report appear in
appendix B.
35 A review of ABX Air and IAI job cards related to the airplane conversion revealed no discrepancies. Because
of the fire damage to the area, the NTSB could not determine whether the supernumerary compartment and its
oxygen system were properly installed according to the job cards.
36 Boeing records showed the sale of conductive hoses to IAI in 2003. IAI’s search of purchasing records
revealed that the last receipts for conductive-style hoses were from 2005, but these hoses might have been received
directly from the hose manufacturer.
17

NTSB Aircraft Accident Summary Report
created by IAI.37 However, airplane modifiers, including IAI, review pertinent ADs to ensure the
airworthiness of all parts used in a postmanufacture modification. As a result, the NTSB
concludes that it is likely that the modifier of the accident airplane would have recognized the
use of a part that was potentially combustible before releasing the airplane to the operator if the
FAA had issued an appliance AD that cited the part manufacturer as well as the airplane model.
Therefore, the NTSB recommends that the FAA formalize the AD process so that, when an
aircraft manufacturer or other source identifies an airworthiness issue with an appliance,
coordination with the appliance manufacturer occurs to ensure that the possible safety risks to all
products using the appliance are evaluated and addressed.
3.3 Proximity of Oxygen System Components to Electrical Wiring
Boeing guidance stated that oxygen installations should include a minimum of 2 inches
between oxygen lines (that is, hoses and tubing) and electrical wiring. The guidance also advised
securing the wiring so that it could not reach oxygen lines and installing the wiring beneath
oxygen lines in case the wiring sagged over time. During postaccident inspections of other ABX
Air 767 airplanes that were modified by IAI, some installations were found to have electrical
wiring in proximity to the stainless steel oxygen supply tubing. Other installations (both in the
cockpit and supernumerary compartment) were found to have electrical wiring that was routed
above and in direct contact with the oxygen tubing, even though the supplemental type certificate
provided for positive separation. This routing created the potential for electrical short circuits to
reach the flexible oxygen hoses. (Figure 5 in section 2.1 shows electrical wiring in contact with
the supply tubing located just above the ceiling in the supernumerary compartment.) The
investigation of the fire aboard the accident airplane found that a short circuit from electrical
wiring was the most likely source to energize the coil spring inside a supernumerary oxygen
system hose, causing the hose material to ignite.
On January 15, 1998, the NTSB issued Safety Recommendations A-98-1 and -2 to the
FAA as a result of an April 1997 in-flight fire aboard a Cessna Citation 650 airplane. The
investigation found that the fire was caused by arcing between electrical wiring and a hydraulic
tube, and postaccident inspections found wiring that interfered with oxygen hoses. Safety
Recommendations A-98-1 and 2 asked the FAA to do the following:
Review the design, manufacturing, and inspection procedures of aircraft
manufacturers, and require revisions, as necessary, to ensure that adequate
clearance is specified around electrical wiring, in accordance with published FAA
guidelines. (A-98-1)
37 After the accident, IAI representatives indicated that the company would be installing nonconductive hoses in
future 767 conversions. Also, in September 2008, IAI issued SB 368-35-094, which recommended replacing
conductive-style hoses in airplanes that IAI had previously modified. (ABX Air owned 18 of the 30 IAI-modified
airplanes.)
18

NTSB Aircraft Accident Summary Report
Review the existing designs of all transport-category airplanes to determine if
adequate clearance is provided around electrical wiring, in accordance with
published FAA guidelines. If deviations are found, require that modifications be
made to ensure adequate clearance. (A-98-2)
The published FAA guidelines referred to in the recommendations were AC 43.13-1A,
“Acceptable Methods, Techniques, and Practices—Aircraft Inspection and Repair,” and
AC 65-15, “Airframe and Powerplant Mechanics Airframe Handbook.” These guidelines stated
that no electrical wire should be located within 1/2 inch of any combustible fluid or oxygen line
and that, if the separation was less than 2 inches, back-to-back clamps or a polyethylene sleeve
should be installed to ensure positive separation. On June 28, 2002, the NTSB stated that the
FAA’s actions fully addressed the recommendations.38 As a result, the NTSB classified Safety
Recommendations A-98-1 and -2 “Closed—Acceptable Action.” However, these actions did not
prevent the wiring problems that were found on the ABX Air airplanes. The NTSB was unable to
determine whether the wiring problems were the result of the IAI design or ABX Air’s
maintenance.
The involvement of oxygen in a fire can significantly expedite its growth and severity. In
its report on the May 11, 1996, accident involving Valujet Airlines flight 592, the NTSB
determined that the accident was the result of an in-flight fire that began with the actuation of
oxygen generators, which were being improperly carried as cargo. The NTSB’s report on this
accident stated, “the oxygen generators would have initially fed the fire with an abundance of
oxygen … resulting in a very rapidly developing fire,” which prevented the airplane from
returning safely to land on the runway from which it had departed about 10 minutes earlier.39
Also, in its report on the September 2, 1998, accident involving Swissair flight 111, which
crashed into water while the pilots were attempting an emergency landing after detecting an
in-flight fire, the Transportation Safety Board of Canada (TSB) found that an aluminum cap
assembly used on an oxygen tube above the cockpit ceiling was susceptible to leaking or
fracturing when exposed to the fire-related temperatures that were likely occurring in that area
38 On April 3, 2002, the FAA stated that it conducted audits on wire separation installation practices used at
Cessna, Boeing, Raytheon, and Learjet and did not find any systemic wire separation problems that would warrant
review of existing designs of all transport-category airplanes. The FAA also stated that it produced two training aids
to increase awareness of wire installation and separation requirements and address wiring maintenance practices. In
addition, the FAA stated that it published a policy statement in the Federal Register that addressed wire installation
drawings, safety analyses of wiring and wire bundles, and continued airworthiness considerations for wiring. The
FAA further stated that it had initiated a program to enhance wire system safety through better design, inspection,
maintenance, and training. Last, the FAA indicated that it was proposing improved wire separation design and
instructions for continuing airworthiness requirements.
39 National Transportation Safety Board, In-Flight Fire and Impact With Terrain, Valujet Airlines Flight 592,
DC-9-32, N904VJ, Everglades, Near Miami, Florida, May 11, 1996, Aircraft Accident Report NTSB/AAR-97-06
(Washington, DC: NTSB, 1997).
19

NTSB Aircraft Accident Summary Report
during the last few minutes of the flight. The TSB stated that it could not determine whether
leaking or fracturing had occurred but that such a failure would have exacerbated the fire.40
The energy in a short circuit could perforate the rigid stainless steel supply tubing and
become an ignition energy source or allow oxygen to reach other fuel and ignition sources. The
NTSB concludes that protecting oxygen system tubing from inadvertent short circuits is
important because of the proximity between the tubing and electrical wiring in a compressed area
as well as the potential severity of a fire involving oxygen. Because the general wire routing
guidelines in AC 43.13-1A and AC 65-15 were advisory only and specific installations can
deviate from airplane manufacturer wiring guidance, the NTSB recommends that the FAA
require airplane manufacturers, modifiers, and maintenance personnel to provide positive
separation between electrical wiring and oxygen system tubing according to, at a minimum, the
guidance in AC 43.13-1A and AC 65-15. The NTSB further recommends that the FAA require
airplane manufacturers and operators to ensure that oxygen system tubing in proximity to
electrical wiring is made of, sleeved with, or coated with nonconductive material or that the
tubing is otherwise physically isolated from potential electrical sources.
3.4 Electrical Grounding of Oxygen System
Examination of the supplemental oxygen system found that it was supported by rubber
clamps so that the system was grounded to the airplane structure through the PVC flexible hoses
and a stainless steel convoluted oxygen hose41 that was routed to an overpressure port. Although
the convoluted oxygen hose and its fittings were metal, they were not designed or evaluated to be
a potential ground path for the electrical wiring that was routed nearby. However, the
investigation determined that the path of least resistance between the supplemental oxygen
system and the airplane structure was through the hoses.
Title 14 CFR 25.1441, “Oxygen Equipment and Supply,” paragraph (b), states that an
oxygen system must be free from hazards in itself. However, the existing method of grounding
the oxygen system could allow inadvertent contact from adjacent electrical wiring to energize
oxygen system components.
Specific electrical grounding requirements would ensure that an electrical current has a
path for reaching airplane structure without energizing oxygen system components. These
requirements could include the use of electrical ground straps, which generally consist of a
braided wire with an eyelet at each end; one eyelet is connected to a system component, and the
other is connected to the airplane structure. (These straps are commonly used to electrically bond
numerous flight control and fuel control system components to an airplane structure.) Ground
straps would also provide redundancy in case the method used to physically isolate electrical and
40 Transportation Safety Board of Canada, In-Flight Fire Leading to Collision with Water, Swissair Transport
Limited, McDonnell Douglas MD-11, HB-IWF, Peggy’s Cove, Nova Scotia 5 nm SW, 2 September 1998, Aviation
Investigation Report A98H0003 (Quebec, Canada: TSB, 2003).
41 Convoluted hoses have ridges or folds (similar to a vacuum cleaner hose).
20

NTSB Aircraft Accident Summary Report
oxygen system components experiences a fault or if the design requirements for the isolation of
oxygen system components become compromised after in-service modifications and
maintenance.
No electrical ground straps were found in the cockpit and the supernumerary
compartment oxygen system installations and near the oxygen supply bottles (below the cockpit)
on the ABX Air 767 airplanes that were examined. (It is important to note that the cockpit was
an original airplane installation and was not part of the airplane’s modification to a cargo
configuration.) If ground straps had been installed on the accident airplane, the short circuit that
energized the supernumerary oxygen hose internal spring might have been directed away from
the spring. Because undesirable potential electrical ground paths exist with the current grounding
method for the 767 oxygen system components, electrical ground straps or another method of
electrical grounding would help protect system components. Other Boeing airplane models and
other manufacturers’ airplanes may have similar undesirable potential electrical ground paths
because the design of their oxygen system is similar to that of the Boeing 767 oxygen system.
The NTSB concludes that an effective method of electrically grounding the supplemental
oxygen system to the airframe would help ensure that oxygen system components are protected
from short circuits. Therefore, the NTSB recommends that the FAA develop minimum electrical
grounding requirements for oxygen system components and include these requirements as part of
the certification process for new airplanes and approved supplemental type certificate
modifications to existing airplanes. The NTSB further recommends that, once electrical
grounding requirements for oxygen system components are developed, as requested in Safety
Recommendation A-09-48, the FAA require airplane operators and modifiers to inspect their
airplanes for compliance with these criteria and modify those airplanes not in compliance
accordingly.
3.5 Aging Oxygen Hoses
The investigation of this accident determined that no life limits were established for
supplemental oxygen system hoses and that some hoses had been in service for more than
40 years. The hoses on the accident airplane were consumed by the fire, so no evidence was
available to show whether an aging hose contributed to the fire. Examination of supplemental
oxygen system hoses on other ABX Air 767 airplanes found that older hoses were stiffer than
newer ones. It is likely that the older and stiffer hoses would be more prone to cracking than the
newer and more flexible hoses. Also, cracked hoses can lead to oxygen leaks.
Because the hoses are common to several airplane manufacturer models, it is possible for
an operator to remove an aging hose from an older in-service airplane and install the hose on a
newer airplane, including one that has been newly delivered. However, oxygen system hoses are
inspected only as part of general maintenance inspections; there are no detailed hose inspections
or tests for plastic parts that have been in service for long periods. Oxygen hose inspections are
also important because the PVC hose material can be degraded over time by pressure,
21

NTSB Aircraft Accident Summary Report
temperature, light, and some chemicals used in normal airplane maintenance and operations
(including cleaning agents, hydraulic fluid, oils, and greases).
The NTSB concludes that, because aging PVC flexible hoses are more likely than newer
hoses to be cracked or otherwise degraded, aging hoses are more likely to leak oxygen, which,
along with an ignition source, could result in a fire. As a result, the NTSB recommends that the
FAA develop inspection criteria or service life limits for flexible oxygen hoses to ensure that
they meet current certification and design standards. The NTSB further recommends that, once
inspection criteria or service life limits for flexible oxygen hoses have been developed, as
requested in Safety Recommendation A-09-50, the FAA require airplane operators to replace
those hoses that do not meet the inspection criteria or that exceed the service life limits.
3.6 Potential for Reading Lights to Become Ignition Source
Passenger service unit (PSU) assemblies were installed in the supernumerary
compartment of ABX Air’s 767 airplanes. The PSU assemblies included reading lights and their
electrical push-button switches,42 which were typically installed near the supplemental oxygen
system.43
During the investigation of this accident, ABX Air found that the sockets containing the
reading lights could be rotated so that the grounded socket housings could touch the electrical
contacts for the switches. To prevent such contact from occurring, the manufacturer of the lights
provided rubber boots for the switch assembly and the lighting socket assembly. These boots
isolated the electrical parts of the light assembly. However, many of the rubber boots were
missing from the ABX Air 767 airplanes that were examined as part of this investigation. The
rubber boots are reportedly difficult to install, so it is possible that the boots were not put on the
assemblies during the cargo conversion or that the boots were taken off but not properly put back
on the assemblies during maintenance.
A PSU reading light without rubber boot protection has the potential to short circuit,
causing sparks. In fact, during this investigation, ABX Air personnel demonstrated that visible
sparks could be produced when the electrical components of the light assembly contacted each
other.44 Such a spark could ignite a combustible material, such as lint accumulations or, with
minor oxygen leakage, the PVC material of a supplemental oxygen system hose.
The PSU reading lights can be eliminated as a possible cause for the fire aboard the
accident airplane for two reasons. First, the first officer had turned off the PSU lights, thus
eliminating a potential ignition source. Second, the flight crew heard a loud popping noise before
42 The PSU assemblies also included a gasper (fresh air vent) assembly.
43 Many transport-category passenger airplanes have oxygen generators, so the electrical parts of the PSU
assembly are not installed near a source of gaseous oxygen.
44 In other installations, it is also possible for the lights to be rotated until their electrical components contact
grounded structure.
22

NTSB Aircraft Accident Summary Report
discovering the fire, and the NTSB’s oxygen hose tests (see section 2.1) showed that an external
ignition source, which would include a spark from a PSU light, did not produce a popping sound
once the hose was ignited, as did the internal ignition source. However, any spark in the
enclosure above the supernumerary occupant seats, whether the result of an internal or external
ignition source, could be generated in an oxygen-rich environment if a concurrent oxygen leak
existed, creating a safety hazard.
Both IAI and ABX Air took action to correct the lack of rubber boots for the PSU reading
lights. The companies’ efforts focused initially on inspections to ensure that the boots were in
place. However, in February 2009, IAI issued SB 368-25-025 to allow operators the option of
using common heat-shrinkable tubing to cover the electrical contacts.
Although the PSU reading light assemblies on the ABX Air airplanes had a specific part
number from the PSU manufacturer, the light assemblies were similar to those that are found in
the passenger cabin of some transport-category airplanes or the supernumerary compartment of
other cargo airplanes. The NTSB concludes that PSU reading lights with exposed electrical
contacts have the potential to move to positions that create inadvertent short circuits and produce
sparks near combustible materials. Therefore, the NTSB recommends that the FAA require
transport-category airplane operators to (1) perform a one-time inspection of all PSU reading
lights installed on their airplanes to ensure that they include rubber boots or use other means to
isolate the electrical parts of the assembly and (2) include, in maintenance manuals or other
maintenance documentation, information about the importance of this electrical protection.
3.7 Smoke Detection System
No smoke detection system was present in, or required for, the supernumerary
compartment. Given that the flight crew was alerted to the fire by the loud pop and hissing
sounds, the rate at which the fire developed, and the intensity of the fire, a smoke detector would
not have helped prevent the fire damage that occurred during this accident. However, in other
situations, a smoke detector could alert flight crewmembers of a fire and allow them to address it
while the fire was still at a stage at which it could be suppressed. For example, smoke detectors
would alert a flight crew to a smoldering fire, which would produce smoke for a prolonged
period of time before generating flames. This type of fire could originate in electrical devices,
such as a coffee maker, within the supernumerary compartment.
Passenger cabins are regularly occupied areas that do not have smoke detectors. As such,
flight crewmembers of these transport-category airplanes rely on the passengers and flight
attendants to report any smoke in the cabin. For transport-category cargo airplanes, smoke
detectors were required in the lavatory and the cargo compartments.45 However, because the
45 See 14 CFR 25.854, “Lavatory Fire Protection,” and 14 CFR 25.858, “Cargo or Baggage Compartment
Smoke or Fire Detection Systems.”
23

NTSB Aircraft Accident Summary Report
supernumerary compartment is not a regularly occupied area, a smoke detector in the
compartment would provide additional safety for cargo operations.
Even though a smoke detector was required for the lavatory, the door to the lavatory is
usually closed. As a result, the detection of smoke emanating from elsewhere in the
supernumerary compartment would be delayed, especially if no one were occupying the
supernumerary seats (as was the case with this accident). The NTSB recognizes the possibility
for a smoke detector to produce a false alarm. However, if this situation were to occur and the
supernumerary compartment were unoccupied, the false alarm could easily be detected by the
nonflying pilot.
In its report on the Swissair flight 111 accident, the TSB concluded that the fire started
above the ceiling on the right side of the cockpit near the cockpit rear wall and that the fire
“spread and intensified rapidly to the extent that it degraded aircraft systems and the cockpit
environment, and ultimately led to the loss of control of the aircraft.” The report also concluded,
in part, that no built-in smoke detection devices were in the area where the fire started and that
the lack of such devices delayed the identification of the existence of the fire.46 However, unlike
the Swissair pilots, who could not access the location where the fire initiated, pilots of cargo
airplanes can access the supernumerary compartment; as a result, they could detect and
extinguish a smoldering-type fire if they were provided with a warning of the fire’s existence.
After the accident, ABX Air initiated efforts to install a smoke detector in the
supernumerary compartment of its airplanes. (The project is still ongoing.) The NTSB concludes
that installing smoke detectors in supernumerary compartments would help flight crews identify
the existence of a fire in an accessible, possibly unoccupied space and initiate suppression of the
fire before it could propagate and become uncontrollable. Some cargo airplanes have an area
between the cockpit and the main deck cargo compartment that is similar to the one in the
accident airplane but is not specifically referred to as a supernumerary compartment by the
operator. Therefore, the NTSB recommends that the FAA require operators of transport-category
cargo airplanes to install smoke detectors in the supernumerary or similar compartment of their
airplanes.
3.8 ABX Air’s Continuing Analysis and Surveillance Program
ABX Air’s CASP provided surveillance and analysis of the company’s continuous
airworthiness maintenance program (CAMP). The CASP had two program components: quality
assurance and reliability. The reliability program component included trend analysis. As part of
this program, ABX Air’s reliability department issued company advisory notices, via e-mail, to
alert maintenance control personnel of repetitive airplane discrepancies. These notices were
46 According to the Swissair flight 111 report, after the accident, Swissair and its maintenance provider
performed a study that focused on minimizing the vulnerability of the MD-11 to an in-flight fire by developing an
early warning smoke detection system. The study resulted in a modification program that installed smoke detectors
in the avionics compartment, the cockpit overhead area, and the first-class galley overhead zone of the MD-11.
24

NTSB Aircraft Accident Summary Report
generated when three defects were noted within 15 days, five defects were found within 30 days,
or one or more defects were found within 2 days of a notice’s closing date. Maintenance records
showed that four company advisory notices were issued—in September and November 2007 and
February and April 2008—for the accident airplane’s oxygen system.
To resolve repetitive aircraft discrepancies identified by advisory notices, ABX Air’s
reliability department held weekly meetings with other company aircraft maintenance
departments and usually a member of the FAA principal maintenance inspector’s (PMI) staff. At
these meetings, personnel reviewed the notices; discussed previous and current corrective
actions; and, if warranted, identified a more in-depth action plan to correct a chronic
discrepancy. A review of the notes from the meetings during which the four advisory notices
were discussed revealed that the oxygen system discrepancies on the accident airplane were
being tracked and discussed but that some discrepancies listed no specific action items to resolve
them. The NTSB is concerned that, even with four advisory notices within 7 months for the
accident airplane’s oxygen system, ABX Air did not develop a specific action plan for fully
resolving repetitive maintenance issues on the accident airplane.
As part of the reliability department’s weekly meetings, ABX Air would determine if any
chronic issues were affecting the airplanes in its fleet based on the advisory notices that had been
issued during a rolling 3-month period. This approach, however, did not allow ABX Air to
adequately track all of the oxygen-related discrepancies on the accident airplane because the
advisory notices issued in September and November 2007 were not considered with the advisory
notices issued in February and April 2008. Although the September and November 2007
advisory notices were reviewed as part of the same rolling 3-month review period, as were the
February and April 2008 advisory notices, the number of discrepancies considered during those
separate reviews did not result in the airplane being taken out of service because of a chronic
problem. However, it is possible that ABX Air could have recognized a chronic problem with the
oxygen system if the company had considered the total number of discrepancies that had
accumulated, and the number of advisory notices that were issued, during the 7-month period
from September 2007 to April 2008.
On June 25, 1990, the NTSB issued Safety Recommendations A-90-98 and -99 after an
October 1989 ground fire aboard Delta Air Lines flight 1558, a Boeing 727 that had been parked
at the gate at Salt Lake City International Airport, Salt Lake City, Utah. At the time of the fire, a
mechanic had been servicing the passenger oxygen system. Safety Recommendations A-90-98
and -99 asked the FAA to do the following:
Review airline maintenance-related trend-analysis programs to verify that such
programs can detect leaking oxygen systems. (A-90-98)
Require air carriers to perform a one-time inspection of the oxygen systems on
their airplanes and promptly repair all leaks. (A-90-99)
On August 17, 1992, the FAA stated that it issued Notice 8300.85, “Servicing and
Maintaining Oxygen Systems on Air Carrier Aircraft While Passengers Are Aboard.” The notice
25

NTSB Aircraft Accident Summary Report
asked PMIs to ensure that each operator had structured its maintenance program so that the
program is able to detect leaks in aircraft oxygen systems. The notice also called for the time
between oxygen system inspection intervals to be decreased or for the performance of a one-time
inspection of oxygen systems. In addition, the notice required PMIs to ensure that each
operator’s FAA-approved CAMP was structured to detect and repair leaking oxygen systems on
a continuing rather than a singular basis. On March 4, 1993, the NTSB classified Safety
Recommendation A-90-98 “Closed—Acceptable Action” and Safety Recommendation A-90-99
“Closed—Acceptable Alternate Action.”
FAA Notice 8300.85 expired after 1 year. Nevertheless, an air carrier’s CAMP should
continuously detect and repair leaks on airplane oxygen systems, and a carrier’s continuing
analysis and surveillance system program should effectively analyze maintenance trends to
ensure, among other things, that repetitive oxygen leaks are not occurring. However, the
procedures in place for ABX Air’s CASP at the time of the accident recognized only those
maintenance problems that had recurred within a specific 3-month period. ABX Air stated that it
now reviews 12 months, rather than 3 months, of discrepancies to determine if any chronic issues
are affecting the airplanes in its fleet.
ABX Air had 42 Boeing 767 airplanes (including the accident airplane) in its fleet, 16 of
which needed oxygen system servicing (for routine maintenance of the oxygen system and for
reported discrepancies) during the 6-month period from January to June 2008. A review of the
maintenance records for each of these 16 airplanes showed that the accident airplane had about
three times more oxygen system service discrepancies than the airplane with the next highest
amount (23 versus 8, respectively). The NTSB concludes that the number of reported
discrepancies regarding the accident airplane’s oxygen system was excessive and indicative of a
chronic problem with the system, yet ABX Air’s CASP did not include adequate actions for
resolving the discrepancies and preventing additional oxygen leaks from occurring. Therefore,
the NTSB recommends that ABX Air modify its CASP so that all identified chronic
discrepancies, such as those affecting the oxygen system on the accident airplane, are effectively
resolved.
26

NTSB Aircraft Accident Summary Report
