In‐flight Fire, Emergency Descent
and Crash in a Residential Area
Cessna 310R, N501N
Sanford, Florida
July 10, 2007
Aircraft Accident Summary Report
NTSB/AAR-09/01/SUM
PB2009-910401
National
Transportation
Safety Board

NTSB/AAR-09/01/SUM
PB2009-910401
Notation 7943B
Adopted January 28, 2009
Aircraft Accident Summary Report
In-flight Fire, Emergency Descent
and Crash in a Residential Area
Cessna 310R, N501N
Sanford, Florida
July 10, 2007
National
Transportation
Safety Board
490 L’Enfant Plaza, S.W.
Washington, D.C. 20594

National Transportation Safety Board. 2009. In-flight Fire, Emergency Descent, and Crash in a Residential Area,
Cessna 310R, N501N, Sanford, Florida, July 10, 2007. Aircraft Accident Summary Report NTSB/AAR-09/01/SUM.
Washington, DC.
Abstract: This report explains the July 10, 2007, accident involving a Cessna 310R, N501N, operated by the National
Association for Stock Car Auto Racing corporate aviation division as a personal flight. The airplane crashed while
performing an emergency diversion to Orlando Sanford International Airport, Orlando, Florida, after an in-flight fire. The
flight had been released despite a known unresolved maintenance discrepancy. Safety issues discussed in this report relate
to the resetting of circuit breakers, the inspection and maintenance of electrical systems in general aviation aircraft, and
the establishment of safety management systems in general aviation corporate operations. Safety recommendations
regarding these issues are addressed to the Federal Aviation Administration.
The National Transportation Safety Board is an independent Federal agency dedicated to promoting aviation, railroad, highway,
marine, pipeline, and hazardous materials safety. Established in 1967, the agency is mandated by Congress through the Independent
Safety Board Act of 1974 to investigate transportation accidents, determine the probable causes of the accidents, issue safety
recommendations, study transportation safety issues, and evaluate the safety effectiveness of government agencies involved in
transportation. The Safety Board makes public its actions and decisions through accident reports, safety studies, special investigation
reports, safety recommendations, and statistical reviews.
Recent publications are available in their entirety on the Internet at <http://www.ntsb.gov>. Other information about available
publications also may be obtained from the website or by contacting:
National Transportation Safety Board
Records Management Division, CIO-40
490 L’Enfant Plaza, SW
Washington, DC 20594
(800) 877-6799 or (202) 314-6551
Safety Board publications may be purchased, by individual copy or by subscription, from the National Technical Information Service.
To purchase this publication, order report number PB2009-910401 from:
National Technical Information Service
5285 Port Royal Road
Springfield, Virginia 22161
(800) 553-6847 or (703) 605-6000
The Independent Safety Board Act, as codified at 49 U.S.C. Section 1154(b), precludes the admission into evidence or use of Board
reports related to an incident or accident in a civil action for damages resulting from a matter mentioned in the report.

Aircraft Accident
Summary Report
Contents
Contents..........................................................................................................................................i
Figures............................................................................................................................................ii
Abbreviations...............................................................................................................................iii
Executive Summary.....................................................................................................................iv
1. The Accident.............................................................................................................................1
1.1 History of Flight.......................................................................................................................1
1.2 Wreckage and Impact Information...........................................................................................2
1.3 Operator and Personnel Information........................................................................................7
1.3.1 General Information.......................................................................................................7
1.3.2 The Accident Pilots........................................................................................................7
1.3.3 Other NASCAR Aviation Division Personnel...............................................................8
1.3.4 Preaccident Maintenance and Airworthiness Responsibilities and Procedures............9
1.3.5 Postaccident Changes..................................................................................................10
2. Investigation and Analysis....................................................................................................11
3. Safety Issues............................................................................................................................15
3.1 Circuit Breaker Reset Hazards...............................................................................................15
3.2 Critical Circuit Breaker Identification....................................................................................17
3.3 Electrical Systems..................................................................................................................18
3.4 Safety Management Systems..................................................................................................19
4. Conclusions.............................................................................................................................23
4.1 Findings..................................................................................................................................23
4.2 Probable Cause.......................................................................................................................24
5. Recommendations..................................................................................................................25
Board Member Statement...........................................................................................................27
National Transportation Safety Board i

Aircraft Accident
Summary Report
Figures
Figure 1. Aerial photograph of main wreckage and impacted homes. The blue arrows
show the general westerly direction of the airplane’s travel at impact...........................................3
Figure 2. Diagram showing the location of impacted homes and trees and pertinent
wreckage. The blue arrows show the general westerly direction of the airplane’s travel at impact.
(Diagram not to scale.)....................................................................................................................4
National Transportation Safety Board ii

Aircraft Accident
Summary Report
Abbreviations
A&P airframe and powerplant
AC advisory circular
agl above ground level
AOPA Airplane Owners and Pilots Association
ATP airline transport pilot
CFR Code of Federal Regulations
DAB Daytona Beach International Airport
DOM director of maintenance
FAA Federal Aviation Administration
ICAO International Civil Aviation Organization
IS-BAO International Standard for Business Aircraft Operations
NASCAR National Association for Stock Car Auto Racing
NBAA National Business Aviation Association
PIC pilot-in-command
PVC polyvinyl chloride
SAFO safety alert for operators
SFB Orlando Sanford International Airport
SMS Safety Management System
SOP standard operating procedures
National Transportation Safety Board iii

Aircraft Accident
Summary Report
Executive Summary
On July 10, 2007, about 0835 eastern daylight time, a Cessna Aircraft Company 310R,
N501N, part of the fleet operated by the National Association for Stock Car Auto Racing
(NASCAR) corporate aviation division, crashed while performing an emergency diversion to
Orlando Sanford International Airport, Orlando, Florida. The two pilots on board the airplane (a
commercial pilot and an airline transport pilot) and three people on the ground were killed. Four
people on the ground received serious injuries. The airplane and two homes were destroyed by
impact forces and a postcrash fire. The personal flight was operating under the provisions of
14 Code of Federal Regulations Part 91 on an instrument flight rules flight plan. Visual
meteorological conditions prevailed at the time of the accident.
The National Transportation Safety Board determines that the probable causes of this
accident were the actions and decisions by NASCAR’s corporate aviation division’s
management and maintenance personnel to allow the accident airplane to be released for flight
with a known and unresolved discrepancy, and the accident pilots’ decision to operate the
airplane with that known discrepancy, a discrepancy that likely resulted in an in-flight fire.
This report discusses safety issues related to the resetting of circuit breakers, the
inspection and maintenance of electrical systems in general aviation aircraft, and the
establishment of Safety Management Systems in general aviation corporate operations.
National Transportation Safety Board iv

Aircraft Accident
Summary Report
1. The Accident
1.1 History of Flight
On July 10, 2007, about 0835 eastern daylight time, a Cessna Aircraft Company 310R,
N501N, part of the fleet operated by the National Association for Stock Car Auto Racing
(NASCAR) corporate aviation division, crashed while performing an emergency diversion to
Orlando Sanford International Airport (SFB), Orlando, Florida. The two pilots on board the
airplane (a commercial pilot and an airline transport pilot [ATP]) and three people on the ground
were killed. Four people on the ground received serious injuries. The airplane and two homes
were destroyed by impact forces and a postcrash fire. The personal flight was operating under
the provisions of 14 Code of Federal Regulations (CFR) Part 91 on an instrument flight rules
flight plan. Visual meteorological conditions prevailed at the time of the accident.
According to NASCAR corporate aviation division personnel, the commercial pilot was
acting as pilot-in-command (PIC) for the personal flight, with the ATP acting as a “safety
pilot.”1 The airplane departed Daytona Beach International Airport (DAB), Daytona Beach,
Florida, about 0822, destined for Lakeland Linder Regional Airport, Lakeland, Florida.
According to Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) air traffic control records, about
0832:49, shortly after reaching a cruise altitude of 6,000 feet mean sea level, the ATP contacted
air traffic control to declare an emergency, stating, “smoke in the cockpit we need…to land at
Sanford.”2 The air traffic controller cleared the flight to proceed directly to SFB and descend to
2,000 feet. DAB airport surveillance radar data indicated that the airplane subsequently turned
toward SFB and began to descend. The last radio transmission from the airplane was received
about 0833:15. This transmission terminated midsentence and seemed to include the phrase,
“shutoff all radios, elec[trical].”3
The Safety Board’s aircraft performance radar study indicated that the last transponder
signal4 from the accident airplane was received about the time of the last radio transmission. At
1
According to NASCAR policies, a pilot acting as PIC on a NASCAR airplane must hold an ATP certificate.
However, NASCAR personnel stated that the commercial pilot was allowed to fly the Cessna 310 as long as the
ATP was on board, acting as a “safety pilot.”
2
The airplane was not equipped with a built-in fire extinguishing system, nor was it required to be so equipped.
NASCAR personnel stated that a handheld fire extinguisher was installed in the airplane, as required by regulations,
and was mounted on the cockpit floor just forward of the right side pilot’s seat. Investigators were unable to locate
the airplane’s handheld fire extinguisher in the wreckage and, therefore, could not determine if the pilots engaged in
any smoke- or fire-fighting efforts.
3
This phrase was consistent with the checklist guidance for an in-flight fire or smoke emergency in the
Cessna 310R Pilot Operating Handbook, which stated – “Electrical load – REDUCE to minimum required.”
4
Transponders are electronic devices, installed on aircraft, which transmit unique aircraft-identifying codes
and, often, other information, such as aircraft altitude, in response to radio-frequency interrogations from
ground-based equipment. Transponders operate using airplane-provided electrical power.
National Transportation Safety Board 1

Aircraft Accident
Summary Report
that time, the airplane was about 8 nautical miles northwest of SFB and was turning toward the
airport while rapidly descending. Primary radar returns5 that were recorded for about another
1 minute 30 seconds showed the airplane maintaining a heading of about 150° towards SFB. The
last of these primary radar returns was recorded about 0834:45; the Board’s study estimated that,
at that time, the accident airplane was about 3 miles northwest of SFB and descending through
about 1,200 feet above ground level (agl). The airplane subsequently crashed in a residential area
about 0.7 nautical miles west of the last primary radar return.
According to several witnesses near the accident site, the airplane was traveling
“extremely fast,” was “very low,” and its wings were “rocking” as it descended. Just before
impact, the airplane entered a “steep bank” and made a sharp turn to the west. Several witnesses
reported seeing smoke trailing from the airplane, and one witness stated, “Smoke was trailing
from the port side.”
1.2 Wreckage and Impact Information
The primary debris path was about 300 feet long and oriented on a westerly (about 255°)
heading. The airplane first struck a north-south line of trees in a right-wing-low attitude at a
height of about 65 feet agl. About 270 feet beyond the first tree strikes, the airplane struck a
palm tree at a height of about 20 feet agl. The airplane then grazed the northeast corner of a
house and subsequently impacted the next two houses along the street. A postcrash fire ensued,
destroying the airplane and the second- and third-impacted homes.
Airplane debris was found along the wreckage path, beginning near the impacted
north-south line of trees and continuing to the impacted houses. (See figures 1 and 2.) The
instrument panel glare shield6 was located on the roof of the first house. Most of the fuselage,
the wings, the instrument panel, some avionics, seats, and the right engine were found in and
around the second- and third-impacted homes.
5
Primary radar signals occur when a radio signal reaches and returns from the skin of an aircraft or other
target. There are no unique identifiers for airplanes, and, typically, no altitude information is associated with
primary radar returns.
6
The glare shield is a molded foam component that protrudes slightly aft of the instrument panel to reduce
glare for pilots viewing the flight instruments.
National Transportation Safety Board 2

Aircraft Accident
Summary Report
Figure 1. Aerial photograph of main wreckage and impacted homes. The blue arrows show the
general westerly direction of the airplane’s travel at impact.
National Transportation Safety Board 3

Aircraft Accident
Summary Report
Figure 2. Diagram showing the location of impacted homes and trees and pertinent wreckage.
The blue arrows show the general westerly direction of the airplane’s travel at impact. (Diagram
not to scale.)
National Transportation Safety Board 4

Aircraft Accident
Summary Report
The airplane was fragmented and severely burned; however, there was no indication of
preimpact structural failure. Flight control cable continuity for the rudder and elevators was
verified from the cable separation points (about the mid-cabin area) to the control surfaces in the
empennage. Aileron control cable continuity was verified from the left wing root outboard to the
left aileron bellcrank. Numerous separations in the control cables in the right wing and forward
fuselage exhibited signatures consistent with tensile overload.
Although much of the airplane was destroyed during the postimpact fire, investigators
observed some discolorations and/or soot deposits on airplane parts that were not directly
exposed to the postcrash fire. For example, the instrument panel deck skin7 that was located
outside the area where the postcrash fire occurred showed signs of thermal damage. Localized
areas of the underside of this component exhibited discolored primer paint, patches of
charred/bubbling paint, and soot deposits, all of which were consistent with an in-flight fire.
Additionally, the instrument panel glare shield, which is normally attached to the upper surface
of the instrument panel deck skin, was found with thermal damage at the attachment point. (The
glare shield was found on the roof of the first house, which was unburned.)
Further, the cabin door was found about 60 feet away from the main wreckage, as
illustrated in figure 1, unburned and with latching pins undamaged. However, numerous soot
deposits were noted on the interior side of this door, again consistent with an in-flight fire. These
soot deposits trailed across the lower portion of the door from an area that would have been near
the lower edge of the instrument panel on the intact airplane to the aft edge of the door. The
undamaged latching pins and the location and existence of the observed trailing soot deposit are
consistent with the pilots having opened the cabin door to vent smoke during an in-flight fire.
Most of the airplane’s electrical system components and associated wiring that were
recovered were severely damaged or destroyed, and most of the electrical insulation had been
burned off those wires. Examination of some small sections of recovered wiring and one partial
wire bundle found among the fuselage wreckage showed characteristics, such as strand fusing
and globules of resolidified copper, that may be consistent with electrical arcing and/or exposure
to heat from the postimpact fire. Too little remained to positively identify which system or
systems those wires were associated with or to determine when the observed characteristics were
created. Recovered flight instruments, cockpit avionics, controls, switches, and circuit breakers
exhibited severe postimpact fire damage and yielded no usable information regarding their
preaccident configuration or condition. A component of the weather radar antenna assembly and
some attached electronic circuit boards exhibited severe impact and thermal damage; however,
no evidence of arcing or other electrical faults was observed.
The insulation on most of the airplane’s wiring was burned off. However, some wiring
with unburned insulation had markings that identified that wiring as having polyvinyl chloride
(PVC) insulation. PVC wire insulation can produce incapacitating fumes when burned,8 and
PVC-insulated wiring has not been used as a general-purpose wire in new airplane designs by
7
The instrument panel deck skin is a sheet metal component that is fastened horizontally above the instrument
panel, acting as a ceiling to the instrument panel compartment.
8
Studies indicate that PVC releases toxic hydrogen chloride gas (hydrochloric acid) when it is heated.
National Transportation Safety Board 5

Aircraft Accident
Summary Report
Cessna and other manufacturers since the early 1970s. However, the FAA permitted the
continued use of PVC-insulated wiring in airplanes in which it was already being installed,
including Cessna 310s, which Cessna has been manufacturing since 1953. Because
PVC-insulated wiring discovered in the wreckage had identifying numbers consistent with
wiring commonly used by Cessna, it is likely that the PVC wiring in the accident airplane was
installed by Cessna when the accident airplane was manufactured in 1977.
Six original (white) pages with pilot-recorded maintenance discrepancies9 were
recovered loose near the wreckage. These entries were dated from March 14, 2007 to July 9,
2007, and addressed the following topics, in chronological order: 1) right engine idle; 2)
transponder mode C; 3) propeller deice amperage draw; 4) horizontal situation indicator
sensitivity; 5) right engine revolutions per minute; and 6) weather radar system.
The discrepancy pages recovered from the wreckage indicated that the first three
discrepancies had been addressed by maintenance personnel, but the last three (dated June 28,
July 6, and July 9, respectively) had not.10 The weather radar discrepancy page, which was dated
July 9, 2007 (the day before the accident), stated:
Radar went blank during cruise flight. Recycled – no response…smell of
electrical components burning turned off unit – pulled radar [circuit breaker] –
smell went away. Radar inop[erative]. [Underlining in original.]
The company pilot who experienced the weather radar system anomaly told investigators
that he documented and reported the weather radar discrepancy to NASCAR personnel, leaving
the white original page in the discrepancy binder in the airplane and providing the yellow copy
to the director of maintenance (DOM), in accordance with the company’s standard operating
procedures (SOP). (For additional details, see the Accident Analysis section of this report.)
However, no corrective action was recorded on the original white page of this discrepancy form.
Additionally, NASCAR Aviation Division personnel could not produce the yellow copy of this
form or any other written documentation indicating that any troubleshooting or corrective
maintenance actions had been taken to resolve the discrepancy before the accident flight.
9
NASCAR pilots documented airplane maintenance discrepancies on nonserialized, duplicate reporting forms
in binders on each airplane. The maintenance discrepancy report form consisted of two pages—a white original and
a yellow carbon copy—in an airplane maintenance discrepancy binder. The white original page was to remain in the
airplane’s maintenance discrepancy binder until corrective maintenance action was taken, and the director of
maintenance was to receive the yellow copy.
10
According to the director of maintenance, after satisfactorily addressing a maintenance discrepancy, the
responsible maintenance technician was to record the corrective action on the white sheet and then initial and date
the sheet.
National Transportation Safety Board 6

Aircraft Accident
Summary Report
1.3 Operator and Personnel Information
1.3.1 General Information
At the time of the accident, NASCAR’s corporate aviation division11 operated a fleet of
nine airplanes, including seven corporate jets, one turbopropeller-driven airplane, and the
accident airplane. NASCAR employed 10 maintenance technicians and about 25 pilots in
support of its airplane fleet. According to NASCAR records, the airplanes were flown about
1,950 flights per year for a total fleet use of about 2,500 to 3,000 flight hours, primarily
transporting NASCAR’s corporate personnel. The accident airplane, a light twin piston-engine
airplane, manufactured in 1977 and purchased by NASCAR in March 1995, was based and
maintained at DAB. The accident airplane was the only piston-engine powered airplane operated
by NASCAR’s corporate aviation division, and, unlike the rest of the NASCAR fleet, was used
primarily to transport parts, goods, and documents for NASCAR, rather than personnel. In
addition to these business flights, the accident airplane was occasionally used by the commercial
pilot for personal flights. As previously noted, NASCAR’s policies did not permit any pilot who
was not an ATP to act as PIC in a company airplane; therefore, the commercial pilot had to be
accompanied by the ATP on all such flights.
1.3.2 The Accident Pilots
The commercial pilot, age 53, was a medical doctor and was hired by NASCAR as a
medical officer; he was not on NASCAR’s payroll as a pilot. As PIC, he occupied the left seat
during the accident flight. The commercial pilot held a commercial pilot certificate with
single-engine, multiengine, and instrument ratings. The commercial pilot also held an FAA
third-class medical certificate, dated December 2005, with no limitations.
A review of company and FAA records indicated that the commercial pilot had
accumulated about 276 total flight hours, 106 hours of which were in multiengine airplanes, and
26 hours of which were in Cessna 310 airplanes. He had flown about 11 and 6 hours,
respectively, in the 90 and 30 days before the accident flight. The commercial pilot last flew the
accident airplane 4 days before the accident. The day before the accident, the commercial pilot
saw patients in his office from 0800 to 1300 and then returned home. He did not perform any
scheduled or emergency surgeries, nor was he on call after he left the office.
The ATP, age 56, was hired by NASCAR as a pilot on October 1, 1985. He occupied the
right seat during the accident flight. He held a multiengine ATP certificate and type ratings in
several business jet airplane makes and models, including the Cessna Citation (-500, -550,
and -600), Dassault Falcon (-50 and -2000), British Aerospace HS-125, Beechcraft Premier IA
11
NASCAR’s corporate aviation division is a separate entity not related to the aviation departments operated
by NASCAR member race teams.
National Transportation Safety Board 7

Aircraft Accident
Summary Report
jet, and Learjet (-60 and -JET). The ATP also held a first-class FAA airman medical certificate,
dated June 2007, with the limitation that he “must wear corrective lenses.”
Company records indicated that the ATP had accumulated 10,580 total flight hours,
67 hours of which were in Cessna 310 airplanes. He had flown about 50 and 17 hours,
respectively, in the 90 and 30 days before the accident flight. According to NASCAR, the day of
the accident was the ATP’s third duty day in the last 9 days. He last flew the accident airplane
with the commercial pilot 4 days before the accident. The ATP was not on duty the day before
the accident, and, on the day of the accident, his duty day began about 0700 (about 1.5 hours
before the accident flight’s departure). The accident flight was his first flight of the day.
The commercial pilot and the ATP both completed Cessna 310 proficiency training at a
professional flight training facility on January 25, 2007.12 During postaccident interviews, the
commercial pilot’s instructor stated that the commercial pilot needed extra classroom instruction,
and an additional 2 hours of simulator instruction to pass the course. The instructor stated that
the chief pilot told him that the commercial pilot would never fly the Cessna 310 without another
pilot on board. The instructor stated that although he was aware of this stipulation, the
commercial pilot successfully completed the training by his own merits.
During postaccident interviews, the ATP’s instructor stated that the ATP was “highly
qualified,” required little or no academic instruction, and showed “exceptional” proficiency
during his two simulator sessions. The ATP completed the training in less than the programmed
syllabus time. According to NASCAR aviation division personnel, the ATP’s Cessna 310
training was conducted to enable him to serve as the safety pilot for the commercial pilot.
1.3.3 Other NASCAR Aviation Division Personnel
NASCAR’s aviation director, who was the head of NASCAR’s aviation division at the
time of the accident, held an ATP certificate and type ratings in 10 airplane models. He had been
employed by the company since 1987 and had been the company’s aviation director, reporting
directly to the president of NASCAR, since 1994.
The chief pilot had been employed in that position by NASCAR since August 2004. He
held an ATP certificate and type ratings in three airplanes and reported to the aviation director.
The DOM held an FAA airframe and powerplant (A&P) mechanic certificate with inspection
authorization. He had been employed by NASCAR since October 1996 and had been DOM since
1998. The DOM reported to the aviation director. The maintenance technician who was
responsible for the accident airplane was also an FAA-certificated A&P mechanic with
inspection authorization. He was hired by NASCAR in October 1995.
12
According to the training syllabus, the 3-day course typically included 9 hours of classroom training,
1.5 hours of briefing, 6 hours of simulator training, and 1.5 hours of debriefing.
National Transportation Safety Board 8

Aircraft Accident
Summary Report
1.3.4 Preaccident Maintenance and Airworthiness Responsibilities
and Procedures
NASCAR’s aviation department was operated under 14 CFR Part 91 and thus, was not
required by the FAA to establish official standard operating procedures. Nonetheless,
NASCAR’s corporate aviation division did develop an SOP manual containing the company’s
policies and procedural guidance. However, investigators found evidence that the SOP guidance
was not consistently updated13 or adhered to by company personnel. For example, the SOP
indicated that company airplanes were for corporate use and that a pilot acting as PIC on a
NASCAR airplane must hold an ATP certificate. Yet, the commercial pilot, who was not ATP
rated, was permitted to fly the accident airplane for personal use.
The guidance contained in the SOP manual was also not readily accessible to company
personnel and, therefore, was not often referenced. When investigators asked NASCAR’s
aviation director for a copy of the SOP manual, he could not immediately locate a copy. The
aviation director told investigators that company personnel did not always follow NASCAR’s
SOPs and that the SOPs were mostly “used as a training tool.”
Moreover, the SOP lacked crucial specifics. The SOP stated, for example, that NASCAR
personnel were to make and maintain records of all scheduling and maintenance issues related to
its airplanes and that those records should be easily retrievable. However, the SOP did not
contain any specific information about the methods, procedures, or tools to be used for
scheduling or tracking airplane maintenance, and evidence indicates that maintenance
information was not accessible to all NASCAR aviation division personnel. For example,
although the DOM used maintenance tracking computer programs to track scheduled
maintenance requirements on all the NASCAR airplanes, other NASCAR personnel did not have
access to these programs. Maintenance technicians had to contact the DOM to get maintenance
information for the airplanes on which they worked. NASCAR did not have a communication
procedure for providing flight operations personnel (pilots and schedulers) with airplane
airworthiness information.
The SOP indicated that the DOM was ultimately responsible for ensuring that all
NASCAR airplanes were maintained in an airworthy condition at all times and for releasing
airplanes for flight after maintenance; however, the SOP did not specify a means for the DOM to
communicate the maintenance status of an airplane to anyone else within NASCAR. Further,
NASCAR had no system through which any individual, including the DOM, could remove an
airplane from the flight schedule because of airworthiness concerns. In practice, such a decision
was made collaboratively by the aviation director, chief pilot, and DOM. Planned and unplanned
maintenance activities were finalized through a combination of verbal and e-mail coordination
between those individuals.
Although the DOM, chief pilot, and aviation director did discuss the weather radar
discrepancy writeup, none of these individuals took any actions to ensure that the discrepancy
13
At the time of the accident, the most recent SOP revision page was dated September 30, 2004.
National Transportation Safety Board 9

Aircraft Accident
Summary Report
was addressed before agreeing that the airplane could be flown. According to the chief pilot, the
DOM told him: “It will be okay. Just tell [the ATP] not to turn it on.”
1.3.5 Postaccident Changes
NASCAR’s corporate aviation division began to address many of these procedural
concerns almost immediately after the accident. The division made several changes to improve
communication about, and awareness of, airplane airworthiness status. These changes included
the following:
• Using aircraft status boards14 that detail the planned maintenance activity and general
status for each airplane in the maintenance department and the schedule and
availability of the maintenance technicians;
• Placing an aircraft status log in each airplane’s maintenance discrepancy logbook for
pilots to review before flight;
• Implementing an improved maintenance-tracking tool that provides a report of
upcoming scheduled maintenance for each airplane in NASCAR’s fleet and is
available on-demand to pilots and maintenance and other NASCAR personnel; and
• Developing new, serialized maintenance discrepancy forms that include a number of
additional entry categories and enable better tracking of maintenance issues.
NASCAR corporate aviation division also made several revisions to its SOPs,15 such as
requiring a placard that states “IN MAINTENANCE” to be placed near the airplane’s entrance
during maintenance and to be removed by the maintenance technician only when the airplane is
returned to service. The revised procedures also require maintenance and flight crew personnel
to meet face-to-face before each flight to discuss the airworthiness of the airplane.
14
The status boards listed the planned maintenance activity for and general status of each airplane. The
availability and schedules of the maintenance technicians were also indicated on these boards.
15
According to the NASCAR corporate personnel department, every pilot and maintenance technician received
the updated procedures and was individually briefed on the new procedures and responsibilities. In addition, these
changes were communicated in memos and at a flight crewmember group meeting.
National Transportation Safety Board 10

Aircraft Accident
Summary Report
2. Investigation and Analysis
On a flight in the accident airplane the day before the accident, another company pilot
had turned off the weather radar and manually pulled the related circuit breaker, cutting
electrical power to the system, in response to a weather radar system malfunction and a “burning
smell.” The burning smell subsequently “went away,” according to the pilot’s entry in the
airplane’s maintenance discrepancy binder, and the pilot flew the airplane for more than an hour
without further incident before landing.
Company records indicate that the weather radar system was installed in the airplane in
May 1988. Its display was mounted in the instrument panel, and the associated 5-ampere circuit
breaker was located on the bottom row of the main circuit breaker panel, with associated wiring
located along the left cockpit sidewall, to the left of the commercial pilot’s left leg. Examination
of similar airplanes revealed that the densest concentration of wiring in Cessna 310R airplanes is
in this area. In addition, fuel lines to instrument panel gauges are routed through this area.
The events on the day before the accident indicate that an electrical problem existed in
the weather radar components or related wiring. Pulling the circuit breaker for the weather radar
stopped a symptom (the burning smell) of the problem by removing electrical power from the
circuit; however, it did not correct the underlying problem. Airplane electrical system anomalies
that result in smoke and/or burning odors are indications of possible fire hazards. Moreover, the
heat, smoke, fumes, and restrictions to visibility associated with an in-flight fire can represent a
significant hazard to airplane occupants and adversely affect an airplane’s airworthiness.
Therefore, the Safety Board concludes that the weather radar system anomaly that was
experienced and formally documented by the NASCAR company pilot the day before the
accident could have developed at that time into a significant in-flight smoke and fire event;
however, the anomaly was temporarily alleviated when the company pilot pulled the related
circuit breaker.
Upon landing, the company pilot left the weather radar circuit breaker pulled, placed the
maintenance binder with the white copy of the discrepancy report on the throttle quadrant, and
provided the yellow copy and a verbal briefing of the incident to the DOM. He also reported the
maintenance discrepancy to the maintenance technician who had primary responsibility for the
accident airplane. According to 14 CFR 91.213, general aviation operations like NASCAR’s
aviation division may operate nonturbine-powered airplanes (such as the Cessna 310), with
noncritical inoperative equipment if the inoperative item is not required for flight and is either
1) removed from the airplane, the cockpit control placarded, and the maintenance recorded, or
2) deactivated and placarded as inoperative.16 Further, Federal regulations state that an
appropriately rated pilot or mechanic must determine that the inoperative equipment does not
constitute a hazard to flight.
16
The FAA explains that equipment may be deactivated in some cases, by pulling the circuit breaker, while
other cases might require that equipment be deactivated by a certificated and appropriately rated maintenance
person.
National Transportation Safety Board 11

Aircraft Accident
Summary Report
Postaccident interviews indicate that NASCAR’s aviation director, DOM, and chief pilot
discussed the weather radar discrepancy on July 9—the day before the accident, after the
company pilot reported it. However, no one examined the airplane to investigate the
discrepancy; no maintenance personnel stated that they had been in the airplane since the
discrepancy was reported; and no company personnel 1) removed the airplane from service; 2)
reset the circuit breaker; 3) placed a placard in the cockpit regarding the discrepancy; or 4)
deactivated the weather radar system, collaring the associated circuit breaker and placing a
placard in the cockpit indicating the system’s inoperative status. The Safety Board concludes that
without examining the weather radar system, and then either removing the airplane from service
or placarding the airplane and collaring the circuit breaker, as well as making a maintenance
records entry, it was not permissible to fly the airplane under Federal regulations.
The final safeguard against the operation of an airplane with an unresolved maintenance
discrepancy is a thorough pilot preflight inspection. In this case, the Safety Board’s investigation
showed that both pilots had access to information that could have alerted them that the accident
airplane had an unresolved maintenance discrepancy on the morning of the accident and could
have led them to take appropriate actions to ensure that the discrepancy was addressed before
flight. Postaccident interviews indicated that the ATP was specifically advised of the weather
radar discrepancy by a telephone call from NASCAR’s chief pilot the night before and in person
by the maintenance technician who was responsible for the accident airplane the morning of the
accident flight. On both occasions, the ATP dismissed the issue as unimportant.17
There is no indication that anyone specifically advised the commercial pilot of the
weather radar discrepancy, but he was the designated PIC for the accident flight and, as such,
had primary responsibility for determining the airplane’s airworthiness. He was responsible for
reviewing all maintenance discrepancy reports in the airplane’s binder. The maintenance
discrepancy binder was prominently placed on the throttle quadrant and would have been easy to
review during the preflight inspection or before the airplane departed. The Safety Board
concludes that the ATP and the commercial pilot had sufficient information about the weather
radar discrepancy and the burning smell to determine that the condition constituted a hazard to
flight and to refuse the airplane unless and until additional actions were performed by
maintenance personnel. The Safety Board further concludes that the pilots accepted the airplane
as made available by NASCAR management and maintenance personnel, despite the fact that no
diagnostic, corrective, or interim maintenance action had been taken to address the discrepancy.
On the day before the accident, the airplane was flown uneventfully for at least 1 hour
after the pilot pulled the weather radar circuit breaker. In contrast, on the accident flight, the
airplane was only airborne for about 10 minutes before the pilots reported a problem. The
airplane crashed about 2 minutes later. The most likely reason for the rapid onset of the problem
is that one of the pilots reset the radar circuit breaker, thus reinitiating the development of the
problem encountered on the previous flight. The circuit breakers would have been difficult for
the ATP to reach and were next to the left leg of the commercial pilot, but nothing was found to
indicate which pilot reset the circuit breaker or when. Examination of the wreckage also
17
It is unlikely that the accident pilots believed they would need to activate the weather radar system during the
relatively short accident flight conducted in visual conditions.
National Transportation Safety Board 12

Aircraft Accident
Summary Report
indicated that the heat of the in-flight fire was most intense in the area above the left-side
instruments, where wiring (including weather radar wiring) and other combustible materials
were located. However, impact and fire damage to the airplane prevented physical confirmation
that the circuit breaker was reset.
Examination of heat and soot evidence on the instrument panel deck skin, which was not
exposed to the intense postimpact fire, indicated that there had been a fire in the area forward of
the left-side instrument panel. The location of the cabin door (about 60 feet from the main
wreckage) and the undamaged door latching pins, indicated that the door was likely unlatched
during flight to alleviate conditions of heat and smoke and was subsequently thrown clear during
the impact sequence. Also, the soot trail on the cabin door was consistent with the flow of smoke
being drawn from below the instrument panel and out the door by the slipstream.
Given the previous day's events, the weather radar system and/or its associated wiring
was most likely the source of the fire. The flammable fluid lines located near that system’s
wiring may have provided additional fuel for the fire; the Safety Board could identify no other
likely sources of smoke or fire.18 Although the weather radar system and/or its wiring is the most
likely source of the fire, the Safety Board concludes that there was insufficient evidence to
conclusively determine the origin of the in-flight fire.
General aviation pilots often reset circuit breakers during preflight preparations unless
the circuit breakers are placarded or collared to show that the associated system is to remain
unpowered. Further, the accident airplane’s “Before Starting Engines” checklist included an item
stating “Circuit Breakers—IN.” Therefore, the Safety Board concludes that it is likely that one of
the pilots, consistent with routine and/or the “Before Starting Engines” checklist for the accident
airplane, reset the weather radar circuit breaker, which restored electrical power to the weather
radar system’s wiring and resulted in the in-flight fire.
The Safety Board considered several explanations for the airplane’s rapid right turn
before it crashed in the residential area. Following is a list of possible scenarios and the Board’s
analysis of each:
1) Did the pilots lose control of the airplane because of exposure to smoke and
fumes? Although the pilots reported smoke in the cockpit when they diverted to SFB,
autopsies revealed no evidence of smoke or soot inhalation in the pilots’ tracheas and
did not show definitive evidence of hydrochloric acid (a byproduct of burning PVC)
exposure.19 Further, toxicological tests did not detect evidence of carbon monoxide or
cyanide in the commercial pilot’s blood.20 This suggests that the pilots did not suffer
18
As previously mentioned, some individual wire strands and one wire bundle found among the wreckage
showed characteristics that could be consistent with either electrical arcing or exposure to heat from an intense fire.
It was not possible to identify which system those short wire fragments were associated with or what caused the
observed characteristics.
19
The Office of the Medical Examiner for Volusia and Seminole Counties, Florida, performed autopsies on the
pilots. The autopsy reports indicated that both pilots died as a result of “multiple blunt force trauma.”
20
Toxicological tests to detect the presence of carbon monoxide and/or cyanide were not performed for the
ATP.
National Transportation Safety Board 13

Aircraft Accident
Summary Report
a prolonged exposure to a significant amount of smoke, which would be consistent
with the short time between the takeoff, declaration of an emergency, and impact.
Further, the airplane’s bank shallowed as it reached a westerly heading, indicating
that the pilots may have had some control of the airplane as it impacted the trees.
2) Did in-flight fire and/or heat compromise the flight controls and make the
airplane uncontrollable? As mentioned above, the airplane’s relatively shallow bank
at the time of impact suggests that the pilots were able to manipulate the flight
controls. Also, an evaluation of the duration, intensity, and location of the fire
indicates that it is unlikely that fire or heat behind the instrument panel could have
been severe enough to render the flight control systems partially or fully
inoperative.21
3) Did the pilots intentionally attempt to divert to an alternate landing site when
they recognized that they would not reach SFB? Aerial photographs of the area
surrounding the accident site show some fields and marshy areas to the west of the
site. The airplane’s sudden, rapid right turn, followed by its shallower bank as it
neared a westerly heading, would be consistent with an intentional diversion. It seems
likely that the pilots would choose to try to reach an alternate landing site if they
believed that they would not be able to reach SFB. However, at the time of impact,
the airplane’s flaps and landing gear were not extended and the airplane was traveling
at a high speed, which would indicate that the pilots had not configured the airplane
for an immediate emergency landing.
4) Did the pilots lose situational awareness because of a preoccupation with the
in-flight fire? An in-flight fire, especially one located in front of the pilots and
directly over their legs, would be very distracting, and it is likely that the pilots would
want to get the airplane on the ground as soon as possible. Therefore, it is possible
that the pilots were distracted by or coping with the in-flight fire.
The Safety Board concludes that, after analyzing the available evidence, it was not
possible to definitively determine the events that led to the accident airplane’s maneuvers away
from SFB.
21
The only portion of the flight control system that would have had lengthy exposure to the in-flight fire was
the steel control shaft that extended through the instrument panel.
National Transportation Safety Board 14

Aircraft Accident
Summary Report
3. Safety Issues
3.1 Circuit Breaker Reset Hazards
Circuit breakers are installed on aircraft to protect wiring. When current flow in a system
exceeds a predetermined value for a period of time, the circuit breaker activates, or “trips,” to
stop current flow through that system by breaking the electrical circuit. To use the system after a
circuit breaker trips, a pilot must reset that circuit breaker manually. Historically, it has been
common practice to reset a circuit breaker on an airplane one time after the breaker trips. The
rationale behind this one-time reset practice is that if the circuit breaker tripped because of
anything other than a transient or nuisance event and if the triggering condition was still present,
the circuit breaker would trip again shortly after being reset. Consistent with historical guidance
related to circuit breakers, page 7-24 of the accident airplane’s pilot operating handbook states,
in part:
All electrical systems in the airplane are protected by push-to-reset type circuit
breakers…. Should an overload occur in any circuit, the resulting heat rise will
cause the controlling circuit breaker to “pop” out, opening the circuit….After
allowing to cool for approximately three minutes, the circuit breaker may be
pushed in…to reenergize the circuit. However, the circuit breaker should not be
held in…if it opens the circuit a second time as this indicates a short circuit.
However, this practice does not consider the cumulative nature of wiring damage and that
the removal of power only temporarily stops the progression of the damage. The aviation
industry has begun to recognize the potential hazards of resetting noncritical circuit breakers
even once. For example, the Transportation Safety Board of Canada report on the September 2,
1998, accident involving an in-flight fire on a SwissAir MD-1122 documented the importance of
not resetting noncritical circuit breakers and recommended that “[r]egulatory authorities
establish the requirements and industry standard for circuit breaker resetting.” In addition, the
Safety Board conducted a review of commercial aviation accidents involving in-flight fires and,
based on its findings, issued several similar safety recommendations. In Safety Recommendation
A-01-83, the Board recommended that the FAA develop and issue an advisory circular (AC) to
address in-flight fire issues.23 On January 8, 2004, the FAA issued AC 120-80,24 “In-Flight
Fires,” which stated, in part:
22
-For additional information, see Transportation Safety Board of Canada, In-flight Fire Leading to Collision
with Water, SwissAir Transport Limited Flight 111, McDonnell Douglas MD-11, HB-1WF, Peggy’s Cove, Nova
Scotia, 2 September, 1998, Aviation Investigation Report A98H0003.
23
The Safety Board issued Safety Recommendations A-01-83 through -87 on January 4, 2002. The full text of
the recommendation letter is available online at <http://www.ntsb.gov/recs/letters/2001/A01_83_87.pdf>. Based on
the FAA’s issuance of AC 120-80, the Board classified Safety Recommendation A-01-83 as “Closed—Acceptable
Action” on April 15, 2004.
National Transportation Safety Board 15

Aircraft Accident
Summary Report
Crewmembers may create a potentially hazardous situation if they reset a CB
[circuit breaker] without knowing what caused it to trip. A tripped CB should not
be reset in flight unless doing so is consistent with explicit procedures specified in
the approved operating manual used by the flight crew or unless, in the judgment
of the captain, resetting the CB is necessary for the safe completion of the flight.
Air carrier manuals and training programs should contain company policies and
explicit procedures regarding resetting tripped CBs, both during flight and on the
ground. The procedures shown in the manuals used by the air carrier’s
crewmembers, maintenance personnel, and airplane ground servicing personnel
should be consistent with the airplane manufacturer’s guidance.25
Many 14 CFR Part 121 (transport category) operators provide their pilots with and follow
procedures based on the AC guidance and have revised their operating handbooks and checklists
to contain written instructions regarding which circuit breakers are considered essential and may
be reset. Moreover, aircraft operated under Part 121 commonly have indicators, such as circuit
breaker markings or coloring, or segregated placement of specific circuit breakers in the cockpit,
showing which circuit breakers are critical.
Although most 14 CFR Part 121 operators have made changes that reflect current
guidance regarding the resetting of tripped circuit breakers, evidence from this investigation
indicates that many Part 91 pilots and operators have not yet made changes to address current
guidance about circuit-breaker resets. One reason might be that individuals operating airplanes
under Part 91 are less likely to have a formal system for addressing AC guidance. As a result,
many general aviation pilots, mechanics, and operators may not have reviewed AC 120-80. Even
if general aviation personnel have reviewed the AC, the guidance contained in manuals provided
by general aviation airplane manufacturers often directly conflicts with the guidance contained in
AC 120-80. Additionally, because the guidance in that AC focused more on transport category
operations, airplanes, and systems, general aviation pilots, mechanics, or operators who did
review the AC might not have perceived its relevance to their operations.
In fact, general aviation pilots still receive information contrary to the guidance in the
AC, indicating that it is acceptable to reset circuit breakers one time, even for nonessential
systems. For example, a May 2007 article in Flight Training, a periodical published by the
Aircraft Owners and Pilots Association (AOPA)26 provided pilots the following advice:
Circuit breakers can be reset simply by pushing in the black button. Wait a few
moments to allow the breaker to cool before resetting. Also, don't try to reset a
24
The full text of AC 120--80 is available online at <http://rgl.faa.gov/Regulatory_and_Guidance_Library/
rgAdvisoryCircular.nsf/0/ed51f1681e9d8c5e86256e4a00744607/$FILE/AC120-80.pdf>.
25
According to the AC, this guidance was directed to crewmembers operating transport category airplanes
under 14 CFR Part 121 and also to crewmembers of passenger-carrying airplanes operating under other parts,
including Part 135 and Part 91.
26
AOPA is a general aviation organization with about 400,000 members. The organization publishes several
magazines and e-mailed newsletters, written primarily for general aviation pilots.
National Transportation Safety Board 16

Aircraft Accident
Summary Report
breaker more than once. If it pops again after the first reset, it's a good indication
that a serious problem exists somewhere in the circuit that demands professional
attention.27
As discussed previously, it is likely that one of the pilots reset the circuit breaker
associated with the weather radar system out of habit or based on the “Before Starting Engines”
checklist associated with the accident airplane. Given the conditions at the time of the flight, it is
unlikely that the pilots believed that they needed the weather radar system. However, the
operating handbook aboard the accident airplane gave no indication that resetting a circuit
breaker once might be dangerous, even though in this case that action likely led to a recurrence
of an earlier problem and, ultimately, to an in-flight fire.
The Safety Board concludes that existing guidance in manuals provided by general
aviation airplane manufacturers regarding the resetting of circuit breakers often does not
consider the cumulative nature of wiring damage and that the removal of power only temporarily
stops the progression of such damage. The Safety Board further concludes that if general
aviation pilots, maintenance personnel, and operators had a more thorough understanding of the
potential hazards of a reset circuit breaker (as outlined in AC 120-80), they would be less likely
to reset a tripped circuit breaker without knowing what caused that circuit breaker to trip.
Therefore, the Safety Board believes that the FAA should develop a safety alert for operators
(SAFO) informing general aviation pilots and maintenance personnel of the circuit breaker
policy contained in AC 120-80. The Safety Board further believes that the FAA should require
that the contents of the SAFO requested in the previous safety recommendation be included in
initial and required biennial training for general aviation pilots and maintenance personnel.
Although 14 CFR Part 91 operators do not operate under FAA-approved operations
specifications and are subject to less FAA scrutiny than Part 135 and 121 operators, information
describing the hazards associated with resetting nonessential circuit breakers could easily be
made available to general aviation operators, pilots, and mechanics. Some of the options
available to the FAA for dissemination of this information, other than the previously
recommended training, include publishing the information on the FAA’s safety-related websites
and providing the information to pilots directly via e-mail or regular mail.
3.2 Critical Circuit Breaker Identification
Although resetting a circuit breaker can pose a hazard, some systems must remain
powered to ensure safe flight. FAA AC 23-17 and its subsequent revisions provide guidance for
aircraft manufacturers related to limiting unnecessary circuit breaker resets by identifying circuit
breakers associated with critical systems. In part, the AC states:
The FAA recognizes that some required circuit protection devices are associated
with circuits that can have no significant impact on safety in flight. Therefore, the
27
This quote is from “Training Notes and News: Popped circuit breaker” in the May 2007 issue of Flight
Training, published by AOPA.
National Transportation Safety Board 17

Aircraft Accident
Summary Report
responsible Aircraft Certification Office…and [the manufacturer] should identify
which circuits and circuit protection devices are essential to safety in flight.
On February 23, 2004, the FAA issued Policy Statement ACE100-2002-005 to clarify
guidance issued in AC 23-17 regarding the identification of critical and noncritical systems and
their circuit breakers in general aviation aircraft.28 This policy statement acknowledged that the
criticality of an electrical system depends on certain variables, such as the equipment on board
the airplane and the flight conditions for any given flight. As a result, the need to reset circuit
breakers associated with these systems varies with operational circumstances. Applying this
analysis to the accident flight, which was a relatively short flight conducted in visual
meteorological conditions, the weather radar would not be considered a critical system; the
weather radar system was not needed for safe flight.
The FAA’s guidance indicated that the airplane manufacturers were to work with the
FAA to identify an airplane’s critical systems during the certification process and develop
related procedures to keep those critical systems powered. However, although this FAA
guidance might have successfully addressed issues related to critical systems and resetting of
critical circuit breakers in newly certificated airplanes, it did not address those issues for older
airplanes that are currently being manufactured under existing certifications. Pilots who are
unaware that circuit breakers should be reset only if the associated system is critical may
unwittingly reset a noncritical circuit breaker and, in doing so, unnecessarily introduce a hazard.
The Safety Board concludes that identification, by an aircraft’s manufacturer or those
responsible for postmanufacture modifications, of which of an aircraft’s systems are critical to a
flight (or to a realm of flight) would enable pilots to make better-informed decisions regarding
which circuit breakers they should or should not attempt to reset before or during flight.
Therefore, the Safety Board believes that the FAA should require aircraft manufacturers and
those responsible for postmanufacture modifications to improve existing guidance, or create new
guidance, regarding which circuit breakers pilots should and should not attempt to reset before or
during flight and to disseminate the resultant guidance to airplane mechanics, pilots, and owners.
3.3 Electrical Systems
The accident airplane had been flown by various operators since it was manufactured in
1977 and was equipped with circuit breakers and wiring associated with both original equipment
and modifications made during the 30 intervening years. The weather radar system, which was
significant to this accident, was a postmanufacture equipment modification. Postaccident
examination of Cessna 310R airplanes similar to the accident airplane revealed that the densest
concentration of wiring in those airplanes is in the area where maintenance personnel would
have been working during the weather radar system modification. Although postimpact damage
precluded a definitive determination of the ignition source, this accident highlights an ongoing
28
The full text of FAA Policy Statement ACE100-2002-005 is available online at
<http://rgl.faa.gov/Regulatory_and_Guidance_Library/rgPolicy.nsf/0/23080994EFAD2D0A86256E44004BE9B3?
OpenDocument>.
National Transportation Safety Board 18

Aircraft Accident
Summary Report
and as-yet unaddressed issue regarding wiring and circuit breakers in general aviation.
Postmanufacture electrical system modifications and installations often result in general aviation
maintenance personnel performing critical work among densely packed layers of wiring of
different ages and materials; this work would be more safely performed if general aviation
maintenance personnel were kept abreast of current industry concerns related to wiring.
The FAA regulations for maintenance of transport-category airplanes have been revised
to address wiring-related concerns, such as 1) deteriorated (aging) wiring; 2) corrosion;
3) improper wire installation and repairs; and 4) contamination of wire bundles with metal
shavings, dust, and fluids. The FAA also requires operators of transport category airplanes to
keep their maintenance personnel updated regarding current wiring-related concerns and best
practices. Although electrical/wiring systems in general aviation airplanes are subject to hazards
and concerns similar to those in transport-category airplanes, the FAA has not addressed similar
issues with regard to maintenance personnel working on general aviation airplanes.
The Safety Board concludes that more thorough and continually updated guidance and
information regarding maintenance and inspection of airplane electrical systems and wiring for
general aviation maintenance personnel would increase the likelihood that they will be aware of
current industry wiring-related concerns such as deteriorated (aging) wiring, corrosion, improper
wire installation and repairs, and contamination of wire bundles with metal shavings, dust, and
fluids and would greatly increase the likelihood that their work will comply with current best
practices. Therefore, the Safety Board believes that the FAA should require that initial and
recurrent training for maintenance personnel working on general aviation aircraft include the
most current “best practices” regarding inspection and maintenance of electrical systems, circuit
breakers, and aging wiring.
3.4 Safety Management Systems
An operator’s SOPs can provide useful procedural guidance if those SOPs are clear,
detailed, readily available, and adhered to by company personnel. Although NASCAR’s
corporate aviation division had developed an SOP manual that established guidelines and
procedures for its operations, those SOPs were not an integral part of the normal operating
regimen and, in fact, were commonly disregarded by NASCAR personnel. Moreover, the SOPs
were incomplete. For example, NASCAR’s corporate aviation division’s SOPs did not define a
procedure for preventing the flight of an airplane with an unaddressed maintenance discrepancy
and, thus, they did not prevent the release and acceptance of the accident airplane on the day of
the accident, although pertinent NASCAR aviation flight, maintenance, and management
personnel were aware of the discrepancy before the accident flight departed. The airplane should
not have been allowed to fly until the discrepancy was addressed.
Contrary to Federal regulations, company policy, and basic good operating practice,
NASCAR maintenance and management personnel permitted the accident airplane to be released
for flight with a significant maintenance discrepancy unaddressed. Therefore, the Safety Board
concludes that, although NASCAR’s corporate aviation division’s SOPs included procedures
designed to ensure that airplane maintenance discrepancies would be properly addressed and
National Transportation Safety Board 19

Aircraft Accident
Summary Report
airplane airworthiness maintained, there was no formal method for determining and ensuring that
an airplane was safe for flight; thus management, maintenance, and flight operations personnel
allowed the operation of an airplane with a known and unaddressed discrepancy.
The Safety Board notes that increasing numbers of operators in the aviation industry have
been incorporating a Safety Management System (SMS) into their operations. An effective SMS
program formalizes a company’s SOPs and establishes methods for ensuring that those SOPs are
followed. Guidance issued in November 2006, by the International Civil Aviation Organization
(ICAO) in Annex 6, “Operation of Aircraft,” states that after January 1, 2009, “[Member] States
shall require, as part of their safety program, that an operator implements a [SMS] acceptable to
the State of the Operator….” It is generally agreed that a successful SMS program is one that
incorporates proactive safety methods to evaluate a company’s flight and maintenance
operations to, at a minimum:
• Identify safety hazards;
• Ensure that remedial action necessary to maintain an acceptable level of safety is
implemented;
• Provide for continuous monitoring and regular assessment of the safety level
achieved; and
• Continuously improve the company’s overall level of safety.
The continuous monitoring and regular assessments involved in a formal SMS program
would have helped to ensure that NASCAR aviation division personnel adhered in practice to
their established processes and procedures and likely would have prevented the accident
airplane’s release for flight without corrective maintenance or ensured the placarding and
deactivation of the circuit breaker. After this accident, NASCAR’s corporate aviation division
established an SMS program in compliance with the International Standard for Business Aircraft
Operations [IS-BAO].29 NASCAR’s SMS implementation involved extensive review of and
changes to their procedures, manuals, safety systems, and culture. After implementation, the
NASCAR aviation department successfully completed an extensive registration audit by IS-BAO
SMS auditors.
The National Business Aviation Association (NBAA)30 actively encourages its business
aviation members to incorporate SMS programs into their operations and endorses the IS-BAO
program. At the time of this writing, the more than 120 IS-BAO-registered corporate aviation
29
The International Business Aviation Council, comprised of business aviation associations from around the
world, developed IS-BAO as a code of best practices designed to help business flight departments worldwide
achieve high levels of safety and professionalism.
30
The NBAA was founded in 1947 to support business aviation in the United States and around the world, in
part by encouraging aviation safety.
National Transportation Safety Board 20

Aircraft Accident
Summary Report
operators include NASCAR Aviation, Hendrick Motorsports, Incorporated, and many NASCAR
corporate sponsors.31
The Safety Board recognizes the benefits of SMS programs and issued a related safety
recommendation in its report on the October 14, 2004, accident involving Pinnacle Airlines
flight 3701 near Jefferson City, Missouri.32 Safety Recommendation A-07-10 asked the FAA to
require that all 14 CFR Part 121 operators establish SMS programs.33
The FAA responded that it had been actively engaged in SMS-related rulemaking
activities and plans to comply with the ICAO guidance by requiring air carrier implementation of
SMS programs.
Based on the FAA’s actions and stated rulemaking intentions related to 14 CFR Part 121
operators, the Safety Board classified Safety Recommendation A-07-10 as “Open—Acceptable
Response,” on January 22, 2008. In a November 26, 2008, Information for Operators, the FAA
stated that they would be filing a difference with ICAO with regard to the January 2009 deadline
for SMS programs because the FAA has not yet developed regulations or policy for
implementation of SMS by U.S. operators. These regulations and policies are currently under
development.
Although the FAA is addressing the issue of SMS programs with 14 CFR Part 121
operators, it has not explicitly addressed the issue of SMS for Part 91 operators. In June 2006,
the FAA published AC 120-92, “Introduction to Safety Management Systems for Air
Operators,” which states, in part, the following:
An SMS is essentially a quality management approach to controlling risk. It also
provides the organizational framework to support a sound safety culture. For
general aviation operators, an SMS can form the core of the company’s safety
efforts.34
Although the FAA recognizes that general aviation operators, such as NASCAR’s
corporate aviation division, which operate under Part 91, would benefit from an SMS, the FAA
has done nothing to ensure that corporate operators adopt SMS programs. The Safety Board
concludes that SMS programs would provide corporate flight departments a formal system of
risk management, safety methods, and internal oversight programs that could improve safety.
31 Hendrick incorporated an SMS program into its operations after a King Air 200 aircraft carrying two pilots
and eight passengers, Hendrick racing team personnel, crashed near Martinsville (Stewart), Virginia, on October 24,
2004. For additional information, see the Safety Board’s website at <http://www.ntsb.gov/publictn/
2006/AAB0601.pdf>.
32
For additional information, see National Transportation Safety Board, Crash of Pinnacle Airlines
Flight 3701, Bombardier CL-600--2B19, N8396A, Jefferson City, Missouri, October 14, 2004, Aircraft Accident
Report NTSB/AAR-07/01 (Washington, DC: NTSB 2007)
33
The full text of this recommendation is available online at <http://www.ntsb.gov/recs/letters/
2007/A07_1_11.pdf>.
34
The full text of AC 120-92 is available online at <http://rgl.faa.gov/Regulatory_and_Guidance_Library/
rgAdvisoryCircular.nsf/0/6485143d5ec81aae8625719b0055c9e5/$FILE/AC%20120-92.pdf>.
National Transportation Safety Board 21

Aircraft Accident
Summary Report
Therefore, the Safety Board believes that the FAA should develop a safety alert for operators
encouraging all 14 CFR Part 91 business operators to adopt SMS programs that include sound
risk management practices.
National Transportation Safety Board 22

Aircraft Accident
Summary Report
