I TECHNICAI L REPORT DOCUMENTATION PAGE
I. Re ort No. 2.Government Accession No. 3.Reci.pient's Catalog No.
NTEB-AAR-77-9
I
-
L. Title and Subtitle Aircraft Accident Report 5.Report Date
New York Airways, Inc., Sikorsky S-61L, N619PA October 13, 1977
Pan Am Building Heliport, New York, New York 6.Performing Organization
May 16, 1977 Code
1. Author(s) 8.Performing Organization
Report No.
3. Performing Organization Name and Address 10.Work Unit No.
2090B
National Transportation Safety Board 1I.Contract or Grant No.
Bureau of Accident Investigation
Washington, D.C. 20594 13.Type of Report and
Period Covered
12.Sponsoring Agency Name and Address
Aircraft Accident Report
May 16, 1977
NATIONAL TRANSPORTATION SAFETY BOARD
Washington, D. C. 20594 14.Sponsoring Agency Code
15.Supplementary Notes
i6.Xbstract
About 1735 e.d.t., on May 16, 1977, the right landing gear of a New York
Airways, Inc., Sikorsky S-61L; N619PA, failed while the aircraft was parked, with
rotors turning, on the rooftop heliport of the Pan Am Building in New York, New York
The aircraft rolled over on its right side and was substantially damaged. At the
time of the accident four passengers had boarded the aircraft and other passengers
were in the process of boarding. The passengers and the three crewmemhers onboard
received either minor or no injuries; however, four passengers who were still outsid
the aircraft and were waiting to board were killed and one was seriously injured.
One pedestrian on the corner of Medison Avenue and 43rd Street was killed and anothe
was seriously injured when they were struck by a separated portion of one of the mai
rotor blades of the aircraft.
The National Transportation Safety Board determined that the probable cause of
the accident was the fatigue failure of the upper right forward fitting of the right
main landing gear tube assembly. Fatigue originated from a small surface pit of
undetermined source. All fatalities were caused by the operating rotor blades as
a result of the collapse of the landing gear. I
17. Key Words 18.Distribution Statement
Fatigue hailure; landing gear; fracture of right hand This document is available
main landing gear forward fitting; fracture initiation to the public through the
and propagation; stress corrosion cracking; fitting National Technical Informa-
P/N S6125-5033-22; surface pit. tion Service, Springfield
Virginia 22151
I9.Security Classification 20.Security Classification 21.No. of Pages I22.Price
I
(of this report) (of this page)
UNCLASSIFIED UNCLASSIFIED 32
NTSB Form 1765.2 (Rev. 9/74)

I
TABLE OF CONTENTS
!
Page
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
. Synopsis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1
1 Investigation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2
1.1 History of the Flight. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2
1.2 Injuries to Persons. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 4
1.3 Damage to Air.cr.a.ft. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 4
1.4 Other Damage . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 4
1.5 Personnel Informatio.n . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 4
1.6 Aircraft Information . . . . . . . . . . . . . 4
1.7 Meteorological Info . rm . at . io . n . . . . . . . . . . . . . 5
1.8 Aids to Navigat.io.n . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 5
1.9 Communications . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 5
1.10 Aerodrome Informa.t.io.n . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 5
1.11 Flight Recorders . . . . . . . . . . 5
1.12 Wreckage and Impact I.nf.or.m.at.io.n . . . . . . . . . . 6
1.12.1 General Examination . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 6
1.12.2 Landing Gear Examination . . . . . . . . . 6
1.13 Medic . a . l . an . d . Pa . th . o . lo . gi . ca . l . I . nf . or . ma . t . io . n . . . . . . 7
1.14 Fire . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 7
1.15 Survival Aspects . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 8
1.16 Tests and Research . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 9
1.17 Additional Information . . . . . . . . . . . 10
1.17.1 History of Heliport Operation 10
1.17.2 History of S-61L Forward Lower Landing .Ge.ar. t.o . . .
Fuselage Attachment Fitting. F.ai.lu.r.es. . . . . . . 11
1.17.3 Normal Helicopter Operations . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
1. . 1 8 New Inves.t.ig.at.io.n .Te.c.hn.iq.ue.s. . . . . . . . . . . 12
2 . Analysis . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
3 Conclusio.n.s . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 16
3.1 Findings . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 16
3. . 2 Probable Cause . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 17
4 Safety Recommendations 17
.
5 Appendixes
. . . . . .
.
Appendix A Investigation and Hear.in.g . . . . . . 19
Appendix B . P ersonnel Information . . . . . . . . 20
.
Appendix C Aircraft Information . . . . . 22
.
Appendix D Wreckage Distribution Chart 23
.
Appendix E Right Main Landing Gear Area. . . . .
(Photograph and diagram) 25
Appendix F .L aboratory Photographs . . . . . .
(Figures 1 through 10) 27
V
ii

NATIONAL TRANSPORTATION SAFETY BOARD
WASHINGTON, D.C. 20594
AIRCRAFT ACCIDENT REPORT
p e
Adopted: October 13, 1977
' 1
2
2 NEW YORK AIRWAYS, INC.
: 4 SIKORSKY S-61L, N619PA
4 PAN AM BUILDING HELIPORT
4 NEW YORK, NEW YORK
4 MAY 16, 1977
4
5 SYNOPSIS
5
1 :
About 1735 e.d.t. on May 16, 1977, the right landing gear of a
New York Airways, Inc., Sikorsky Model S-61L helicopter, N619PA, failed
5 while the aircraft was parked, with rotors turning, on the rooftop
6 heliport of the Pan Am Building in New York, New York. The aircraft
6 rolled over on its right side and was substantially damaged. Four
6 passengers had boarded the aircraft and other passengers were in the
7 process of boarding. The passengers and the three crewmembers onboard
7 received either minor or no injuries; however, four passengers who were
8 still outside the aircraft and were waiting to board were killed and one
9 was seriously injured. One pedestrian on the corner of Madison Avenue
10 and 43rd Street was killed and another was seriously injured when they
10 were struck by a separated portion of one of the main rotor blades of
the aircraft.
11
12 The National Transportation Safety Board determines that the
12 probable cause of the accident was the fatigue failure of the upper
13 right forward fitting of the right main landing gear tube assembly.
16 Fatigue originated from a small surface pit of undetermined source.
16 All fatalities were caused by the operating rotor blades as a result
17 of the collapse of the landing gear.
17
19
20
22
23
25
27
K

- 2 -
1. INVESTIGATION
s ligh
1.1 History of the Flight by a
On May 16, 1977, New York Airways, Inc. (NYA) Flight 972, a
Sikorsky S-61L, N619PA, was being operated as a regularly scheduled right
passenger flight from the rooftop heliport (JPB) of the Pan American cap ta
Building at 200 Park Avenue, Manhattan, New York, to John F. Kennedy with
International Airport (JFK), New York, New York. from
help
The flight originated as Fli ht 971 from JFK Airport and them ;
H
landed at the heliport at about 1732. -/ There were 20 passengers and a
crew of 3 aboard.
the 1
After approaching from the northeast and landing, the aircraft The
I
was taxied to the boarding gate, which required a 180' turn to the left firs.
and a short taxi of 10 to 20 feet to position the aircraft properly. comp
The captain stated that he used the tailrotor instead of his brakes to turn
assist in taxiing. He set his brakes and left the tail wheel unlocked,
which was a normal procedure. The aircraft was chocked and passengers
began to deplane. According to witnesses and passengers, the landing roto
had been smooth and gentle. ~ rapi
The captain remained in his seat with his hands on the controls.
The collective was bottomed (negative pitch) and torque was about 18 and
percent on each engine. The engine speed controls (ESC) were positioned one
to maintain 100 percent rotor speed (NR) and the automatic flight control f lig
system was on with all controls centered--a normal operating procedure. door
The first officer stated that as he filled out the flightlog, he had his hear
knee against the collective to insure that it was bottomed. f ron
was
The captain estimated that they had been sitting on the heliport the
for 1 to 2 minutes. Passengers had deplaned and the outbound passengers s to1
were boarding. He heard a "faint noise," which he believed to have come who
from the rotor system, followed immediately by a "crumpling, crunching so :
noise" and a buckling sound. The crumpling sound was accompanied by a on :
settling and yawing motion, followed by a roll of the aircraft to the inql
right. air1
ins
As he heard the first "faint noise," the captain reached for
the EX'S to shut the engines down. He pulled them back immediately to
the ground idle detent and then into the engine shutoff position before of
the aircraft rolled beyond its 45" position. When the ESC's are in the of
shutoff positfon, fuel is shut off in the engine fuel control units. he
The captain stated that when the blades struck the concrete they were tow
not being powered by the engines. f ux
whi
-1/ A l l times herein are eastern daylight, based on the 24-hour clock. it
to

r
I
- 3 -
The first officer stated that he felt the aircraft settle
slightly to the right and heard a crunching noise, followed immediately
by a "gentle smooth roll" to the right.
, 972, a After hearing the first sound, the first officer looked to his
tluled right at the captain who was in the right cockpit seat and saw the
erican captain reach for the ESC's. He also saw the blade tip path plane rotating
Fnnedy with the aircraft. The relationship of this tip path remained constant,
from the upright position, throughout the entire roll. He reached up to
help the captain pull the ESC's but the captain already had his hands on
! and them; he stated that the whole sequence happened quickly.
iers and a
With the ESC's in the shutoff position, the aircraft continued
the roll and the main rotor blades struck the heliport concrete surface.
The captain heard the breaking of plexiglass as the blades struck the
first officer's overhead window. When the aircraft stopped the captain
completed the procedure to shut down the aircraft. A l l switches were
.
turned off
The captain stated that it did not occur to him to use the
rotor brake after the aircraft began to roll; the events developed too
rapidly to allow the rotor brake to be effective.
At the time of the accident, inbound passengers had deplaned
and four outbound passengers had boarded or were boarding the aircraft;
one passenger was approaching the first step of the airstair door. The
flight attendant, who was positioned inside the aircraft at the entrance
door stated that, as a woman passenger was coming up the airstair she
heard a "loud metallic crumbling sound," which she believed to be coming
from the right underside of the aircraft. She noticed a vibration which
was followed immediately by the aircraft tilting to its right side. As
the aircraft continued its roll to the right, she heard the engines
stop. She stated that the woman on the airstair door and a passenger
who had just boarded fell backward against the door. She braced herself
so she would not fall as the door closed when the aircraft came to rest
on its right side. After the motion stopped, the flight attendant
inquired about the safety of the four passengers who were inside the
aircraft and upon ascertaining that they were alright, she began to give
instructions regarding evacuation.
A passenger who was approaching the airstair door at the time
of the accident stated that as he placed his left foot on the first step
of tha.airstair, he heard a loud noise like an engine backfire and then
he noticed the aircraft moving laterally first and then begin to tilt
toward him. He said that he'stepped back as the helicopter tilted
further toward him and he began moving toward the front of the aircraft
while keeping his hands on the aircraft's side. In the few seconds that
it took the aircraft to stop, he had moved forward to a position adjacent
to the cockpit. He was not injured.

- 4 -
The accident occurred during daylight hours at latitude 40' 45'
north and longitude 73' 58' west. The elevation of the accident site is
855.23 feet m.s.1.
1.2 Injuries to Persons
Injuries -Crew Passengers Others
Fatal 0 4 1
Serious 0 1 1
Minor/None 3 17 2
1.3 Damage to Aircraft
The aircraft was substantially damaged.
1.4 Other Damage
Two automobiles located on the streets below the accident site
were damaged by separated main rotor blade leading edge counterweights.
An office on the 36th floor of the west side of the Pan Am Building was
extensively damaged when an 11-foot section of a main rotor blade penetrated
a window. The New York Airways passenger waiting/control tower area
located in the east corner of the heliport had five windows shattered
and a light fixture knocked from its structure. A 6-foot section of the
rooftop edge railing on the north side was penetrated and bent outward
by a main blade section.
1.5 Personnel Information
The three crewmembers were properly certificated and qualified
for the flight. (See Appendix B.)
1.6 Aircraft Information
The aircraft was certificated, equipped, and maintained in
accordance with Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) requirements and
New York Airways procedures.
The records of maintenance and inspection from June to December
1976;were examined. There were no notable patterns of malfunctions or
items of malfunction related to the failure of the right landing gear.
The program of inspection and recording was comprehensive and complete.
The program calls for: (1) A daily preflight. (2) A "safety inspection"
every 40 hours--an in-depth inspection to discover any irregularities.
The entire aircraft is opened up and additional functional tests are
performed. (3) A phase check. One of five phases is performed every
70 hours. All five phases are completed within 350 hours. The type of
inspection and corrective maintenance is progressive. Selected items
and AD compliance work, if any, are performed during these checks.

- 5 -
At the time of the accident, the landing gear had a total time
of 6,913:15 hours. There was no service life limit on the landing gear
or on its components. Overhaul was required every 9,900 hours. The
gross weight and c.g. were within prescribed limits for both takeoff and
landing. About 950 lbs of Jet A-1 fuel were onboard, and the aircraft
weighed about 17,668 lbs when the accident occurred. (See Appendix C.)
1.7 Meteorological Information
At the time of the accident, surface weather observations for
the'heliport were as follows: Broken clouds at 1,500 ft, visibility--15 mi,
temperature--71° F, wind--260° at 12 kn, altimeter setting--30.26 in Hg.
1.8 Aids to Navigation
Not applicable
1.9 Communications
Not applicable
d
1.10 Aerodrome Information
The heliport is located on top of the Pan American Building,
at 200 Park Avenue, New York. The heliport is operated by New York
Airways, Inc., and was certificated under an airport operating certificate
issued by the Federal Aviation Administration on January 3, 1977, with
an effective date of February 1, 1977. It is an Index A heliport based
on the requirements of 14 CFR 139, with no exemptions. The heliport is
owned by the Grand Central Corporation and leased to New York Airways,
Inc. New York Airways is responsible for the administration, operation,
and maintenance of the heliport.
The heliport is located at an elevation of 855.23 feet m.s.1.
and has an effective landing area of 131 feet by 131 feet. Only VFR and
special VFR operations are authorized. Approach and departure routes
for the heliport are specified in the certification manual for the
heliport. The heliport pavement is of reinforced concrete. A lighted
windsock is located at the northwest corner and another at the extreme
northeast corner of the heliport.
1.11 Flight Recorders
*
N619PA was equipped with a Fairchild A-100 cockpit voice
recorder (CVR), Serial No. 4129. The recording was complete from landing
at JFK Airport through the landing on the Pan Am Building heliport to
the accident event.

- 6 -
Two minutes and twenty-one seconds following the landing, the
cockpit area microphone recorded a "cracking" sound and banging sound as
the blades contact the roof. There was no recorded crew conversation
for the period that N619PA was on the roof.
The aircraft was not equipped, nor was it required to be
equipped, with a flight data recorder.
1.12 Wreckage and Impact Information
1.12.1 General Examination
Aircraft damage was limited to the main rotor blades, the main
rotor system, the copilot's enclosure (fuselage station (F.S.) 72, water
line (W.L.) 170), the right side of the fuselage just forward of the
right main landing gear attachment points (F.S. 209.5, W.L. 89 and 156),
the right main landing gear supports (F.S. 221), and the horizontal
stabilizer mounted on the right side of the tail rotor pylon (F.S.
704.5, W.L. 191). A l l access panels and fairings were in place and
attached, except for the nose battery compartment access door which had
been opened after the rollover to disconnect the battery.
The five color coded main rotor blades had been damaged exclusively.
Each blade was 28 feet 10 inches long and weighed 209.3 lbs. A l l blades
had bent upward along their span, and heavy surface contact smears were
located on their bottom surfaces beginning at midspan and continuing
outward toward the tip.
The only parts of the helicopter that were thrown from the
heliport were outboard sections of these five rotor blades. The longest
distance traversed by the blade portions was four blocks north and one
block west of the Pan American Building.
The outboard sections of the five main rotor blades, including
the tip caps, were recovered in the area below the heliport on the roofs
of lower buildings or at street level. (See Appendix D.)
There was no preimpact damage noted to any of the aircraft's
systems or powerplants. The fuel tanks, which were located in the lower
fuselage tub structure beneath the passenger cabin floor, were intact
with no evidence of fuel leakage. About 120 gallons of fuel was removed
from the aircraft after the accident.
"
1.12.2 Landing Gear Examination
Examination of the landing gear showed that.the left main gear
assembly was intact with no visual damage. The right main landing gear
had separated from its upper (F.S. 221,.W.L. 164) and lower (F.S. 221
and 243.5, W.L. 106) fuselage attachment fittings and was lying beneath
the aircraft. The aircraft was righted, and the right landing gear and
lower fuselage were examined.

- 7 -
The two tires, axle, and main oleo strut were intact. Both
tires were fully inflated; the tires were removed and the axle examined.
Visual examination disclosed no evidence of damage. The oleo was fully
extended. The energy absorbing strut, which angles from the upper
fuselage attachment fitting (F.S. 221, W.L. 164) outboard to the oleo
strut's upper attachment fitting, had separated through its lugs at both
the upper and lower ends.
The lower landing gear supports consist of two sets of upper
and lower tube assemblies which form two "V's"; the apex of each "V"
attaches to the upper and lower ends of the main oleo strut (outboard)
and to the fuselage attachment fittings (inboard). The forward upper
and lower tubes (F.S. 221, W.L. 106) attach to the forward fuselage
attachment fitting through P/N 6125 - 50333 - 22 fitting which is
bolted and bonded to the forward upper tube. The aft upper and lower
tubes attach to the aft fuselage fitting (F.S. 243.5, W.L. 106) in a
similar manner. (See figures 1 and 2, Appendix E.) The lower attachment
,tube was bent downward and had broken adjacent to the inboard tube
assemblies fitting. The forward upper tube assembly had separated at
the main oleo strut attachment fitting. The complete tube was still
attached to the P/N 6125-50333-22 fitting. However, this fitting, which
also has a lug to which the lower tube attaches had fractured.
The fractured areas were examined in the Safety Board's metallurgical
laboratory and under the Safety Board's control at Sikorsky Aircraft/United
Technologies' laboratories.
1.13 Medical and Pathological Information
No occupants of the aircraft were seriously injured. Post-
mortem examination of the four passengers that had not yet boarded the
aircraft and the one pedestrian revealed that they died as the result of
impact trauma caused by strikes from the main rotor blades and separated
portions of those blades. The cause of death of the four passengers was
found to be multiple lacerations, fractures, and internal injuries. The
cause of death of the pedestrian was found to be fractures of the skull
and lacerations of the brain.
A review of the cockpit crew's medical records disclosed no
evidence of pre-existing physical problems which could have affected
their judgment or performance.
There was no fire; however, foam was laid over the area in the
immediate vicinity of the aircraft as a precautionary measure.

1.15 Survival Aspects
This was a survivable accident for the aircraft occupants.
When the aircraft came to rest on its right side the first officer, who
was in the left seat, was hanging in his harness. The captain looked
back and saw that the cockpit door, which is a two-panel sliding door,
was partially open and was jammed. This door was fully open before the
accident. Although the captain's emergency evacuation station was in
the cabin, he realized that he could not enter the cabin through the
door. The captain unbuckled the first officer; the first officer then
opened his emergency exit, which is the window on his side, and exited
by pushing the window free and climbing out on top of the aircraft.
The first officer climbed off the aircraft on the bottom side.
efi
He did not see anyone moving the heliport. He went around the tail
section to the other side of the aircraft at the rotor head area and saw
what he believed to be transmission fluid on the ground. Two cargo
personnel were there and he told them to put foam down. He went back to
the (bottom side) of the aircraft, pushed a cargo cart closer and climbed
back up onto the aircraft.
The captain followed the first officer out the left emergency
exit. He walked back toward the tail section on the now horizontal left
side of the aircraft, opened the left rear emergency door,and climbed
down into the aircraft. There were three male and one female passengers
inside of the cabin and a flight attendant at the front of the cabin.
A l l were calm; there was no panic. The captain told them to come to the
rear exit. The three male passengers climbed out by themselves. The
first officer then escorted each passenger back to the baggage cart and
they climbed down. The woman who had been on the airstair when the
aircraft began to roll over had injured one of her hands. The flight
attendant was attempting to give first aid and the captain began to
assist; however, after looking at the injuries briefly they assisted her
in leaving the aircraft. The flight attendant then deplaned followed by
the captain.
The New York Police Department (NYPD) received a call to respond
to Madison Avenue and 43rd Street for a "jumper" 21 who hit a pedestrian.
Then a detective unit and a fire department unit arrived, at which time
a call over the radio said that a helicopter had hit the Pan American
Building. A detective said he saw a body and a 6-foot length of rotor
blade at the Madison Avenue location. He then walked to the Pan American
Build2hg and went up an elevator with some firemen. About 4 minutes
elapsed from the initial response until the detective was on the elevator.
-21 A person who had committed suicide by jumping from a building.

r
- 9 -
When the detective and the firemen arrived at the 50th floor, the elevator
went back down to the bottom. The Fire Department key was then used to
take command of the elevators. When the detective arrived at the top
s,omeo ther fireman were already there.
The NYPD personnel stated that initial confusion existed in
getting to the roof because the elevators remained in automatic operation
immediately after the accident. When the fire service arrived they
operated the elevators manually with the fire service keys until building
personnel arrived to operate the manual controls.
At 1738, the New York Fire Department (NYFD) received a special
call to send the rescue unit to the Pan American Building. This was
immediately followed by a call for a full response--all units from the
fire battalion--to that location. Because of the difficulty encountered
with the automatic elevator operation, foam was not applied until 1745
or 1750 when the first fire department units arrived on the roof.
d The crash/fire/rescue (CFR) procedures outlined for the heliport
were contained in the heliport operations manual. The procedures were
valid and clearly stated for each employee. Some of the station personnel
were not completely familiar with the contents of the CFR portion of the
manual. However, the primary firefighters, which were the two cargo
handlers, were aware of their CFR duties and performed their duties as
dictated by the manual. One cargo handler had received no formal CFR
training. The foam hoses were deployed immediately and most of the
emergency procedures went into effect.
The most significant shortcomings of the CFR activities were:
(1) The alarm box to the City/Building fire alarm system was not activated.
(2) Foam was not applied to the aircraft immediately although C02 was
applied. (3) There was no NYA employee who immediately took charge of
the accident site to insure the CFR emergency plan was implemented
properly.
1.16 Tests and Research
md
1. The Safety Board's metallurgical laboratory examined the right
forward main landing gear tube assembly (P/N 56125-50338-2) 21 and the
right aft inboard main landing gear fitting with a portion of the tube.
xn Examination of the right forward main landing gear P/N S6125-
50333-22 fitting showed that it fractured near where the end of the tube
or. assembly is located within the fitting (See figure 2, Appendix F). This
was near the bottom of a 1.498/1.500-inch diameter hole which is drilled
in the fitting to accommodate the tube. Fractography of the fractured
features indicated that a fatigue crack had begun along the 0.12-inch
radius near the bottom of the hole where the hole changes from a cylindrical
to a conical shaped section. (See figure 4, Appendix F.)
-31 The S6125-50338-2 tube assembly includes the S6125-50333-22 fitting,

1
-
10 -
Examination of the fracture using a scanning electron microscope
(SEM) disclosed fracture features typical of h' rycle fatiaue p r o p a m n
from these origin areas. Fatigue had propagat2down and through the
bottom of the fitting and out - . (See Figure 4, A ppendix F.) Approximately
40 percent of the fractured cross sectional area of the fitting appeared
cracked. The remaining sections of fracture away from this fatigue
region were typical of overload separations.
~~ ~ ~ ~ ~~~~
Some areas were missing along the fracture line that corresponded
to the overload portion of the separation. These missing areas suggested
that the fitting opposite the fatigue region and near its forward side
had broken in compression since compression breaks tend to fragment the
fracture.
The missing area on the forward side was seen by comparing the
mating fracture halves and noting that the fracture on the inboard half
went through the small hole used to locate the tube in the fitting while
on the outboard half the fracture in the same area progressed through
the bolt hole. (See Figure 3, Appendix F.)
Detailed examination of the fracture origin area disclosed two
origin sites, both of which appeared to be at discontinuities in the
radius (See Figures 5 and 6, Appendix F). The two origins produced two
planes of fatigue fracture slightly offset from one another. The two
fatigue cracks grew into one large crack a short distance out from the
radius. Because of the extent and symmetry of the crack arrest markings
and the locations of the origins with respect to a ratchet mark (step-
like portion of the fracture connecting the fatigue planes), one origin
was considered secondary and the other was considered the main origin.
A substance was found which completely filled the discontinuity at the
secondary origin and partially filled the discontinuity at the main
origin. (See Figures 5 and 6, Appendix F.) Energy dispersive X-ray
analysis of the substance at the main origin area disclosed elements
normally associated with the fitting alloy system along with an appreciable
amount of sulfur and small amounts of calcium and potassium all of which
are foreign elements. The silicon energy peak was strong indicating
silicon as a primary element of the substance; the fitting alloy normally
contains less than 0.4 by percent weight of silicon.
The radius in the origin area was mostly covered by an adhesive
(EC-2214) used during fabrication of the assembly. Analysis of this
adhesive material indicated that it was high in aluminum and silicon
with some sulfur, chlorine, potassium and calcium.
Hardness and electrical conductivity measurements of the
fitting gave values averaging Rockwell "B" 83 and 40 percent International
Annealed Copper Standard, respectively. These measurements, as well as
the microstructural characteristics, appeared normal for 7075 aluminum
alloy heat treated to the T73 condition (specified material and heat
treatment).

- -
11
Examination of the right-hand aft main landing gear fitting
n and tube assembly showed fractures that were all typical of an overload
separation. No evidence of fatigue or other type of pre-existent
cracking was found on this assembly.
PY
1.17 Additional Information
1.17.1 History of Heliport Operation
d
Heliport operations began in 1965 from the Pan Am Building
with New York Airways operating Boeing Vertol 107 equipment. There was
public pressure against the NYA petition because of noise and safety
reasons. Hearings were held and the operation was approved. A 5-year
permit from the NYC Planning Commission was issued for the period 1964
through 1969. The NYC Department of Marine and Aviation then issued an
Air Facility Permit for 1 year, which was later renewed for another 1-
year term.
In February 1968, NYA ceased operations from the heliport
because of a contractual disagreement between Pan American World Airways
and Trans World Airlines. During the disagreement, the facility permit
for the heliport expired. Shortly before the expiration date NYA requested
a renewal. The Department of Marine and Aviation refused to renew the
permit because (1) NYA was not operating onto the roof heliport currently,
(2) NYA presented no plans in the renewal petition to begin operations
at a set date, (3) public pressure was such that a hearing should be
held. Since NYA was not operating to the roof, the city determined that
there was no point in renewing the permit at that time. No further
petitions were presented, and in 1969 the NYC Planning Commission permit
expired.
On November 24, 1976, the New York City Planning Commission
held a public hearing to consider the application of New York Airways,
le Inc., for a resumption of scheduled helicopter operations from the roof
top heliport on the Pan American Building. Before the hearing, local
community planning boards 5 and 6, representing the neighborhoods most
directly affected by the proposed operation, gave their approval of the
granting of an operational permit after an extensive review of the
facility. The operation was then approved by the New York City Board of
Estimate, the Department of Marine and Aviation, and by the Federal
Aviation Administration.
The resolution by the Board of Estimate, City of New York, to
It
grant a permit to operate the Pan American Building Heliport was approved
December 6, 1976, and adopted January 20, 1977. The special permit was
11 for a 3-year period.

1
-
12 -
On January 27, 1977, New York Airways, Inc., applied to the
Department of Marine and Aviation for an Air Facility License for the
operation of a heliport on the roof of the Pan American Building. This
license was granted on January 31, 1977, for 1 year. Operations began
on February 1, 1977, and were conducted without incident until this
accident. During this period New York Airways conducted 7,240 helicopter
operations from the rooftop heliport.
1.17.2 History of S-61L Forward Lower Landing Gear to Fuselage
Attachment Fitting Failures
On July 15, 1963, a forward lower landing gear to fuselage
attachment fitting failed when a Los Angeles Airways S-61L, N300Y, was
parked with rotors turning at the American Airlines gate area, Los
Angeles International Airport. While ground personnel loaded mail
aboard the aircraft, a snapping noise was heard, and the helicopter
tipped to the right and rolled over on its right side. Outboard sections
of the five main rotor blades contacted the ramp surface and separated.
One person on the ground was injured and windows in the airline terminal
building were broken.
Investigation revealed that forward lower landing gear fitting,
P/N S6125-50312-22, had failed in fatigue and had separated, allowing
the right main landing gear to collapse. This part had a total time of
1912:43 hours.
As a result of this occurrence, the manufacturer redesigned
the forward and aft fittings, both left and right, as follows:
1. Forging material was changed from 7079T6 aluminum alloy
to 7075T73 aluminum alloy.
2. Wall thickness of the tube portion of the fitting was
increased from .120 to .160 inches.
3. The internally machined radius was increased to .12
inches.
The redesigned fittings were installed on all existing S-61L
models (four at that time) per Sikorsky Service Bulletin 61 B25-1 dated
September 18, 1963. Appropriate engineering drawings were changed
requiring installation of the improved fittings. (PN's 6125-50333-21-22
and PN's 4125-50334-21-22).
Subsequently, all S-61L model aircraft, including those purchased
by New York Airways, Inc., had the improved fittings installed. This
accident resulted from the first failure since the redesigned fittings
had been installed.

-
- 13
1.17.3 Normal Helicopter Operating Procedures
Experience has shown that the overall safety of helicopter
operations is enhanced by operating the engines and rotor system during
the frequent passenger enplaning and deplaning of normal scheduled
operations. Dynamic components of a helicopter's main rotor system are
not designed for frequent stops; therefore, rotor shutdown at each stop
would shorten the service life of these components which are critical to
safety of flight and would increase the possibility of component fatigue.
The stability of a helicopter is increased when the rotor
blades are turning during high and variable wind conditions. Also,
blade flapping at low rotor RPM during such wind conditions increased
the possibility of blade damage to the aircraft's airframe.
1.18 New Investigation Techniques
None
2. ANALYSIS
The aircraft was certificated, equipped, and maintained according
to applicable regulations. The aircraft's powerplants and systems were
not factors in the accident. The gross weight and c.g. were within
prescribed limits. The flightcrew was properly certificated and each
crewmember had received the training and off-duty time prescribed by
applicable regulations.
According to the flightcrew, passengers, and other witnesses,
the landing on the heliport was gentle. The aircraft was taxied to the
normal position without incident, and approved procedures were followed
for passenger operations. The fact that the engines were operating, and
the rotor was turning had no bearing on the failure of the landing gear.
No control input was made which could have overloaded the part which
failed.
The captain stated that he had his hands on the controls, and
that the collective was bottomed, which would produce minimum torque on
the engines. This setting was verified by the first officer. The
cyclic was in the neutral position according to the captain and the
first officer. The first officer stated that as the aircraft began to
roll, he saw the blade tip path rotate with the aircraft and remain
constant in the windshield in relation, to the fuselage. The constant
relatlonship shows that no cyclic input was induced which in turn would
have tilted the rotorhead and the blade tip path plane.
7
The Safety Board reviewed the actions taken by the crew from
the first sound of failure until the blades struck the heliport surface,,
and concluded that the actions taken by the crew--to close the ESC's--'
\,
were correct. The location of the aircraft and the number of people

- -
14
around the helicopter, coupled with an unexpected noise from an area \
initially believed by the captain to be the rotor system, dictated that \
the engines be shut down immediately. The fact that both ESC's were
!
shut down so quickly probably prevented further damage and injury and
possibly prevented a fire.
The pilot's reaction of not applying the rotor brake was also
correct. The rotor brake is not designed to stop a rotor head turning
at 100 percent NR quickly. It is designed to stop the rotor blades once
NR is below 40 percent. For an emergency shutdown the lever may be
forced forward into the full on position, after closing the engine W M
control with a delay time of 5 seconds. Since the captain barely had
time to close the ESC's before the blades struck the ground, the Safety
Board concludes that he could not have used the rotor brake for an
emergency stop of the rotor blades. At 100 percent NR, the application
of the rotor brake will cause the brake to heat up and possibly burn
out, thereby creating a fire hazard.
The Safety Board, therefore, concludes that the failure of the
gear was not the result of a pilot input.
The fracture of the right hand landing gear forward fitting,
P/N S6125-5033-22, stemmed from a fatigue crack through 40 percent of
the cross section.
The crack location in the bottom portion of the fitting
suggested that bending stresses, which compressed the top of the fitting
and placed tension on the bottom, had caused the fracture to begin and
propagate. Planar orientation of the crack was diagonally downward and
inboard through the support rib between the fuselage and lower diagonal
tube attachment. Since fatigue cracks tend to propagate in a plane
perpendicular to the direction of principle tension stress, a tension
force along the diagonal tube may also have contributed to the crack
propagation.
The material properties of the fitting, including the chemical
composition, were considered normal for 7075-T73. Originally the fitting
was designed using the alloy 7079-T6 (P/N S6125-50312). However, problems
with stress corrosion cracking warranted changing the material to 7075-
T73 (T73 condition is highly resistant to stress corrosion).
The radius showed no appreciable attack from corrosion, indicating
this area vas adequately protected against it. There was no indication
of stress corrosion on the fracture surface although pitting of the
fracture was noted. This pitting, however, was much more intense in the
latter stages of fatigue propagation, indicating that the corrosion
medium may have entered when the crack opened to the atmosphere (breaking
through the support rib and lower portion of the fitting).

- -
15
Two holes, however, did enter into the interior of the tube.
These holes were located along the inboard edge of the adhesive just
inboard of the tube end and were open between the external and internal
radius of the fitting. An access, therefore, existed for water or other
mediums to penetrate into the interior and collect along the lower
portion of the radius. If the adhesive in the radius area contained
minute holes through its thickness, then corrosion attack would have
been highly localized, and would have produced discontinuities such as
those found on the failed fitting.
The discontinuities found could also have been produced by
normal microconstituent particles or phases in the material which were
exposed to the surface. The sizes of the discontinuities, however, were
much larger than the compound phases or particles found in the microsections
which would mean that the discontinuities would have to be unusually
large particles or groupings of second phase particles.
The substance found in the cavities of the discontinuities is
believed to be the adhesive used in the assembly. It is not known
whether the adhesive entered the cavity before or after the fracture.
The Safety Board, therefore, concludes that the fracture of
the right main landing gear was the result of fatigue originating from a
small surface pit of undetermined source.
Although, in this case, the rotating main rotor blades resulted
in fatalities when the right landing gear failed, there is a good possi-
bility that similar fatalities could have occurred if gear failure had
occurred during shutdown or starting procedures. In considering all of
the safety aspects of continued rotor rotation during enplaning and
deplaning operations versus frequent rotor shutdowns, the Safety Board
concludes that continued rotor rotation during such operations is, in
most cases, safer. This conclusion is based on the fact that, (1)
frequent rotor shutdowns shorten the service life of the rotor components
and the engine by introducing more fatigue cycles thereby reducing the
overall safety of operations, (2) potential safety hazards such as rotor
brake fires, engine acceleration malfunctions, and main blade to fuselage
contact due to excessive flapping at low rotor RPM are introduced by
repeated rotor brake applications, and (3) the stability of the helicopter
is increased due to the gyroscopic effects resulting from the rotating
blades. Continued rotation is especially important for safety during
variable, high wind conditions.
* The heliport was certificated properly under 14 CFR 139. All
the equipment which was required to meet the crash fire rescue (CFR)
criteria was met or exceeded. The personnel requirements, as stated in
the heliport manual, were met or exceeded.

- -
16
The Safety Board also concludes that, although some confusion
existed and some misunderstanding of CFR responsibilities were apparent,
the CFR activities were effective for the situation.
The Safety Board recommends that the cockpit cabin door of
the aircraft remain open. Helicopters operated under 14 CFR 127 are
not required to have the cockpit door closed and locked as are aircraft
operated under 14 CFR 121. Since the door is not usually used in normal
operations, the Safety Board believes that it is unnecessary and could
become an obstruction between the cockpit and cabin during emergency
conditions.
