Crash of Skydive Quantum Leap
de Havilland DHC-6-100, N203E
Sullivan, Missouri
July 29, 2006
aviation
AIRCRAFT ACCIDENT SUMMARY REPORT
NTSB/AAR-08/03/SUM
PB2008-910403



NTSB/AAR-08/03/SUM
PB2008-910403
Notation 8040
Adopted September 16, 2008
Aircraft Accident Summary Report
Crash of Skydive Quantum Leap
de Havilland DHC-6-100, N203E
Sullivan, Missouri
July 29, 2006
National
Transportation
Safety Board
490 L’Enfant Plaza, S.W.
Washington, D.C. 20594

National Transportation Safety Board. 2008. Crash of Skydive Quantum Leap, de Havilland DHC-6-100,
N203E, Sullivan, Missouri, July 29, 2006. Aircraft Accident Summary Report NTSB/AAR-08/03/SUM.
Washington, DC.
Abstract: This report explains the July 29, 2006, accident involving a de Havilland DHC-6-100, N203E,
registered to Adventure Aviation, LLC, and operated by Skydive Quantum Leap as a local parachute
operation flight. The aircraft crashed into trees and terrain after takeoff from Sullivan Regional Airport,
near Sullivan, Missouri. The safety issues discussed in this report relate to the inadequate protection
provided by single-point restraints for parachutists. Included are safety recommendations addressed to
the Federal Aviation Administration and the United States Parachute Association regarding this issue.
The National Transportation Safety Board is an independent Federal agency dedicated to promoting aviation, railroad,
highway, marine, pipeline, and hazardous materials safety. Established in 1967, the agency is mandated by Congress through
the Independent Safety Board Act of 1974 to investigate transportation accidents, determine the probable causes of the accidents,
issue safety recommendations, study transportation safety issues, and evaluate the safety effectiveness of government agencies
involved in transportation. The Safety Board makes public its actions and decisions through accident reports, safety studies,
special investigation reports, safety recommendations, and statistical reviews.
Recent publications are available in their entirety on the Web at <http://www.ntsb.gov>. Other information about available
publications also may be obtained from the website or by contacting:
National Transportation Safety Board
Records Management Division, CIO-40
490 L’Enfant Plaza, S.W.
Washington, D.C. 20594
(800) 877-6799 or (202) 314-6551
Safety Board publications may be purchased, by individual copy or by subscription, from the National Technical Information
Service. To purchase this publication, order report number PB2008-910403 from:
National Technical Information Service
5285 Port Royal Road
Springfield, Virginia 22161
(800) 553-6847 or (703) 605-6000
The Independent Safety Board Act, as codified at 49 U.S.C. Section 1154(b), precludes the admission into evidence or use of
Board reports related to an incident or accident in a civil action for damages resulting from a matter mentioned in the report.

Aircraft Accident
Summary Report
C
ontents
Figures ...............................................................................................................................v
Abbreviations .................................................................................................................vi
Executive Summary ......................................................................................................vii
1. The Accident .................................................................................................................1
2. Investigation and Analysis ........................................................................................3
2.1 Loss of Power in One Engine ........................................................................................................3
2.2 Pilot Performance of Emergency Procedures ............................................................................5
2.3 Intersection Takeoff Considerations ............................................................................................8
2.4 Operator Information .....................................................................................................................8
2.4.1 General .....................................................................................................................................8
2.4.2 Maintenance Program for the Airplane .............................................................................9
3. Safety Issues ...............................................................................................................12
3.1 Accident Survivability .................................................................................................................12
3.1.1 Single‑Point Restraints in the Accident Airplane ............................................................13
3.1.2 Parachutists’ Seating Locations, Restraint Use, and Injuries .........................................13
3.1.2.1 Tandem pair seated on the right...................................................................................14
3.1.2.2 Tandem pair seated on the left .....................................................................................15
3.1.2.3 Three solo parachutists ..................................................................................................15
3.2 Restraint Performance ................................................................................................................16
4. Conclusions ................................................................................................................19
4.1 Findings ..........................................................................................................................................19
4.2 Probable Cause ..............................................................................................................................20
5. Recommendations .....................................................................................................21
iii
National Transportation Safety Board



Aircraft Accident
Summary Report
F
igures
1. Witness’ photograph showing accident airplane above
the end of runway 24 with smoke and flames visible from
right engine. (Inset shows an enlarged view.) ...........................................................................1
2. Aerial map of UUV showing runway 24, the intersecting
taxiway, and the accident site. .....................................................................................................2
3. Preaccident photograph of accident airplane interior
showing both foam block benches and some left-side
restraints (view from left‑side cargo door, looking
forward); photograph provided by a relative of the pilot. ....................................................10
4. Photograph of the crush damage on the fuselage
(right wing removed from wreckage). ......................................................................................12
5. Seating diagram showing the approximate preaccident
locations of the parachutists and the pilot with respect to
the crush-intrusion line. ..............................................................................................................14
v
National Transportation Safety Board

Aircraft Accident
Summary Report
A
bbreviAtions
AC advisory circular
CAMI Civil Aerospace Medical Institute
CFR Code of Federal Regulations
EMMA equalized maintenance for maximum availability
FAA Federal Aviation Administration
FSDO flight standards district office
IAS indicated airspeed
MEL minimum equipment list
MMEL master minimum equipment list
PMA parts manufacturer approval
SB service bulletin
TBO time between overhaul
USPA United States Parachute Association
UUV Sullivan Regional Airport
vi
National Transportation Safety Board

Aircraft Accident
Summary Report
e s
xeCutive ummAry
On July 29, 2006, about 1345 central daylight time, a de Havilland DHC-6-100,
N203E, registered to Adventure Aviation, LLC, and operated by Skydive Quantum Leap
as a local parachute operation flight, crashed into trees and terrain after takeoff from
Sullivan Regional Airport, near Sullivan, Missouri. The pilot and five parachutists were
killed, and two parachutists were seriously injured. The flight was operated under 14 Code
of Federal Regulations Part 91 with no flight plan filed. Visual meteorological conditions
prevailed. Witnesses at the airport reported (and photographic evidence showed) that,
shortly after the airplane lifted off from the runway, flames emitted from the airplane’s
right engine. Witnesses reported that the airplane continued to fly low above the treetops
before turning right and diving nose first into the ground.
The safety issues discussed in this report relate to the inadequate protection
provided by single-point restraints for parachutists. Two safety recommendations to the
Federal Aviation Administration and two to the United States Parachute Association are
included.
vii
National Transportation Safety Board



Aircraft Accident
Summary Report
1. t A
he CCident
On July 29, 2006, about 1345 central daylight time, a de Havilland DHC-6-100,1
N203E, registered to Adventure Aviation, LLC, and operated by Skydive Quantum Leap
as a local parachute operations flight, crashed into trees and terrain after takeoff from
Sullivan Regional Airport (UUV), near Sullivan, Missouri. The pilot and five parachutists
were killed, and two parachutists were seriously injured. The flight was operated under
14 Code of Federal Regulations (CFR) Part 91 with no flight plan filed. Visual meteorological
conditions prevailed.
According to photographic evidence provided by a witness, the pilot taxied the
airplane onto runway 24 from the intersecting taxiway, which is about 1,700 feet from the
runway’s west end, and began a takeoff roll to the west from that location, rather than
using the runway’s entire 4,500-foot length. Photographic evidence depicting the airport
windsock shows that the airplane departed into a moderate headwind. Witnesses at the
airport reported seeing the airplane take off and climb to about treetop height.2 Several
witnesses reported hearing a “poof” or “bang” noise and seeing flames and smoke coming
from the right engine. One witness reported that, after the noise and the emergence of flames,
the right propeller was “just barely turning.” Photographic evidence shows that, at one point
after the flames occurred, the airplane was about one wingspan (about 65 feet) above the
runway. (See figure 1.) One witness estimated that the airplane climbed to about 150 feet.
Figure 1. Witness’ photograph showing accident airplane above the end of runway 24 with smoke
and flames visible from right engine. (Inset shows an enlarged view.)
1 The DHC‑6‑100 was originally manufactured by de Havilland, but the type certificate is currently held
by Viking Air Limited of Sidney, British Columbia, Canada.
2 According to estimates from witnesses and other sources, the tree height ranged from 30 to 100
feet.
1
National Transportation Safety Board

Aircraft Accident
The Accident Summary Report
Witnesses reported that the airplane lost some altitude, regained it, and then
continued to fly low above the treetops before turning to the right and disappearing from
their view behind the treeline. Another witness in the backyard of a residence northwest
of the airport reported that she saw the airplane flying straight and level but very low
over the trees before it dived nose first to the ground. She and her father called 911, and
she said that local emergency medical service personnel arrived within minutes. The
airplane impacted trees and terrain and came to rest vertically, nose down against a tree
behind a residence about 1/2 mile northwest of the end of runway 24. (An aerial map of
the runway and accident site is shown in figure 2.)
Figure 2. Aerial map of UUV showing runway 24, the intersecting taxiway, and the accident site.
2
National Transportation Safety Board

Aircraft Accident
Summary Report
2. i A
nvestigAtion And nAlysis
The airplane was powered by two Pratt & Whitney Canada PT6A-20,
550-horsepower engines equipped with three-bladed, single-acting, hydraulically
operated, constant-speed, reversible Hartzell propellers with feathering3 capabilities.
Examination of the wreckage, including both engines and propellers, revealed that the
right engine’s compressor turbine disk was intact but that its attached blades4 were
fractured; the damage observed within the engine resulted in the loss of engine power. No
evidence of any other preimpact conditions that would interfere with normal operations
was found during examinations of the airplane, engines, propellers, and components.
2.1 Loss of Power in One Engine
Microscopic examination of the right engine’s fractured compressor turbine blades
revealed features consistent with overload. Additional damage was observed in engine
sections beyond the compressor turbine section along the engine’s gas path. Also, several
of the right engine’s compressor turbine blade tips were missing. The overload fractures
on the blades in the compressor turbine section and the damage beyond that section were
consistent with mechanical damage caused by separated compressor turbine blade tips
migrating within the engine. Because no preimpact anomalies were observed in engine
areas forward of the damaged compressor turbine along the engine’s gas path, there is no
evidence that an ingested object, such as a bird or debris, initiated the overload events in
the compressor turbine section.5 Therefore, the initial blade separation originated within
the compressor turbine section. However, because several separated compressor turbine
blade tips were not located for examination, the source of the initial event or condition
that precipitated the overload events could not be determined.
The airplane’s maintenance records indicate that the left and right engines had
accumulated 5,829 hours and 6,493 hours since overhaul, respectively (15,155 hours and
17,264 hours since new, respectively), which far exceeded the manufacturer’s recommended
time between overhaul (TBO) period of 3,600 hours, as stated in Pratt & Whitney Canada
Service Bulletin (SB) 1803R1, “Turboprop Engine Operating [TBOs] and Hot Section
Inspection Frequency.”6 However, Federal regulations do not require operators of aircraft
3 Feathering means to rotate the propeller blades so that the blades are parallel to the line of flight
(streamlined to the airflow) to reduce the drag caused by the blades and prevent further damage to an engine
that has stopped operating.
4 The compressor turbine blades were Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) PMA (parts manufacturer
approval) blades manufactured by Doncasters, Inc., Turbo Products Division.
5 In addition, the engine’s intake port is at the rear of the engine and is designed with a mesh‑screen
cover, further reducing the likelihood of an ingestion of objects or birds during flight.
6 Further, SB 1803R1 specifically excludes engines that have been used in parachute jump operations
from eligibility for the manufacturer’s program for extending TBOs. Pratt & Whitney Canada reported that it
had no documentation indicating that the operator requested to participate in the TBO extension program.
3
National Transportation Safety Board

Aircraft Accident
Investigation and Analysis Summary Report
operated under 14 CFR Part 91 to comply with manufacturers’ recommended TBOs
specified in SBs or service information letters.
In developing TBOs, manufacturers analyze the cumulative effects of various
stresses placed on different components over time. Based on this analysis, manufacturers
determine a schedule of maintenance and inspection that they believe will provide an
acceptable level of safety. Overhauling an engine within the manufacturers’ recommended
TBO increases the likelihood that potentially catastrophic conditions that may otherwise
be undetectable will be discovered and corrected. Therefore, the Safety Board concludes
that, although damage to the accident airplane’s right engine precluded determination of
the initial event that precipitated the overload fracturing of the compressor turbine blades,
and although the operator was not required to comply with the engine manufacturer’s SBs,
it is possible that the initiating fracture event within the engine resulted from a condition
that could have been detected and corrected during an engine overhaul performed within
the manufacturer’s recommended TBO.
Because most parachute jump operators function under Part 91 and thus, are not
required to comply with TBOs, the Safety Board in its 2008 Special Investigation Report
on the Safety of Parachute Jump Operations,7 issued Safety Recommendation A-08-63 on
September 16, 2008, that asked the Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) to do the
following:
Require parachute jump operators to develop and implement Federal
Aviation Administration-approved aircraft maintenance and inspection
programs that include, at a minimum, requirements for compliance with
engine manufacturers’ recommended maintenance instructions, such as
service bulletins and service information letters for time between overhauls
and component life limits.[8]
In addition, to help operators implement effective maintenance and inspection
quality assurance programs, on September 16, 2008, the Safety Board issued Safety
Recommendation A-08-64 that asked the FAA to do the following:
Develop and distribute guidance materials, in conjunction with the United
States Parachute Association [(USPA9)], for parachute jump operators to
7 National Transportation Safety Board, Special Investigation Report on the Safety of Parachute Jump
Operations, Special Investigation Report NTSB/SIR‑08/01 (Washington, DC: NTSB 2008).
8 Safety Recommendation A‑08‑63 is classified “Open—Await Response.”
9 The USPA is a voluntary organization made up of about 31,000 individual members and about
270 operator members, also called “group members” or “drop zones.” USPA supports and promotes safe
skydiving through parachuting training, rating, and competition programs and distributes safety information
through printed publications and its website.
4
National Transportation Safety Board

Aircraft Accident
Investigation and Analysis Summary Report
assist those operators in implementing effective aircraft inspection and
maintenance quality assurance programs.[10]
2.2 Pilot Performance of Emergency Procedures
According to section 3.1 of the emergency procedures of the airplane’s flight
manual, which was found in the wreckage, the emergency procedures for an engine
failure during takeoff include, in part:
If engine failure occurs above V [minimum control speed11] and a decision
mc
is made to continue the take-off, proceed as follows: … Maintain heading
by applying rudder and lowering wing against the live engine as necessary
and lower nose to hold desired airspeed. … Advance power levers. …
Power lever of failed engine - IDLE. … Propeller lever of failed engine -
FEATHER. … Hold 71 knots IAS[12] if flaps at 30°; … 83 knots IAS if flaps at
0°. … When clear of obstacles, the flaps should be retracted in increments
and the airspeed increased appropriately per the above schedule in order
not to lose altitude during retraction. Best single engine rate of climb is
achieved with flaps 0° at 83 knots IAS.
The emergency procedures to configure a multiengine airplane for climb following
a loss of engine power during takeoff are generally considered “memory items,” which
are procedures that a pilot must execute immediately from memory rather than first using
a checklist. However, evidence showed that the accident pilot failed to effectively perform
most of those procedures. For example, as the photograph in figure 1 illustrates, the
airplane’s rudder was not deflected and its wings were not banked toward the operating
engine. Witnesses’ descriptions of the flight indicated that the pilot instead allowed the
airplane to drift to the right (toward the inoperative engine)13 before it nose-dived into the
ground.
10 On September 16, 2008, the Safety Board also issued Safety Recommendation A‑08‑69 that asked
the USPA to do the following: “Work with the Federal Aviation Administration to develop and distribute guidance
materials for parachute jump operators to assist operators in implementing effective aircraft inspection and
maintenance quality assurance programs.” Safety Recommendations A‑08‑64 and A‑08‑69 are each classified
“Open—Await Response.”
11 According to FAA definitions, V is the minimum airspeed at which the airplane could remain
mc
controllable with its critical engine inoperative; for twin‑engine airplanes, the critical engine is the engine in
which a failure would have the most adverse effect on directional control. On the DHC‑6‑100 airplane, which
has engines that both rotate in conventional, clockwise rotation as viewed from the pilot’s seat, the left engine
is the critical engine.
12 Knots IAS stands for knots indicated airspeed, which is the speed of the airplane as shown on the
airspeed indicator on the cockpit control panel.
13 A turn toward an inoperative engine can degrade climb performance. See National Transportation
Safety Board report AAR‑79‑10 for information about a similar accident involving a DHC‑6‑300 airplane. This
report stated, in part, “expected climb performance can be degraded by ... turns into the failed engine, by
failure to minimize drag by inducing a sideslip or not maintaining correct speeds, and by turns away from the
headwind.”
5
National Transportation Safety Board

Aircraft Accident
Investigation and Analysis Summary Report
The information provided by witnesses, the nose-down attitude of the wreckage,
and the crush damage to the forward fuselage of the airplane are consistent with an
uncontrolled descent due to an aerodynamic stall. Further, the filaments of the stall
warning light, recovered from the wreckage, were found stretched, which is consistent
with the light having been illuminated at impact.
According to a performance assessment provided by the airplane’s current
type‑certificate holder, given the weather conditions at the time of the accident, airport
altitude, and calculated weight for the accident airplane, the airplane should have been
capable of a positive single-engine climb rate of about 300 feet per minute if the pilot had
configured the airplane properly according to the published procedures by feathering the
propeller on the failed engine and attaining the recommended airspeed.
However, according to the Airplane Flying Handbook, published by the FAA, factors such
as “engine and propeller wear, or poor technique in airspeed, bank angle, and rudder control,”
among others, can reduce actual rate-of-climb performance.14 Several performance-reducing
factors were present during the accident flight: the accident airplane’s engines were thousands
of hours beyond the manufacturer’s recommended TBO, and photographic evidence indicates
that the pilot used poor technique by not banking the airplane or using rudder control to
maintain airspeed as prescribed in the airplane’s emergency procedures. Therefore, the
Safety Board concludes that, although engine wear would likely have prevented the accident
airplane from obtaining its maximum published single-engine climb performance, the pilot’s
failure to maintain airspeed, according to the technique specified in the published emergency
procedures following the loss of power in one engine, negated any possibility of continued,
controlled flight that could have allowed for a return to the airport or other suitable landing
area. Because the pilot did not effectively configure the airplane for continued single‑engine
flight, the airplane could not sustain a climb; therefore, the pilot’s only other available option
would be to maintain a controllable airspeed and perform a controlled descent. However, the
airplane’s descent was not controlled; the pilot allowed the airplane’s airspeed to decay to the
point of aerodynamic stall.
In the Safety Board’s 2008 special investigation report on parachute operations,15
the Board identified several parachute operations accidents in which the pilots were
deficient in maintaining airspeed and properly executing emergency procedures. As a
result, the Safety Board issued Safety Recommendation A-08-65 on September 16, 2008,
that asked the FAA to do the following:
Require parachute jump operators to develop initial and recurrent
pilot training programs that address, at a minimum, operation- and
aircraft‑specific weight and balance calculations, preflight inspections,
14 See U.S. Department of Transportation, Federal Aviation Administration, Airplane Flying Handbook,
FAA‑H‑8083‑3A (Washington, DC: FAA, 2004): Ch. 12, p. 12‑10.
15 See NTSB/SIR‑08/01.
6
National Transportation Safety Board

Aircraft Accident
Investigation and Analysis Summary Report
emergency and recovery procedures, and parachutist egress procedures
for each type of aircraft flown.[16]
In addition, the Safety Board issued Safety Recommendation A-08-66 on
September 16, 2008, that asked the FAA to do the following:
Require initial and recurrent pilot testing programs for parachute jump
operations pilots that address, at a minimum, operation‑ and aircraft‑specific
weight and balance calculations, preflight inspections, emergency and
recovery procedures, and parachutist egress procedures for each type of
aircraft flown, as well as competency flight checks to determine the pilots’
competence in practical skills and techniques in each type of aircraft.[17]
As noted in the emergency procedures, the propeller configuration is also a
factor in the accident airplane’s single‑engine climb performance; the propeller of the
inoperative engine should be feathered. Although the accident airplane was equipped
with a propeller autofeathering system designed to automatically feather the propeller
of an underpowered engine, the system was deactivated.18 With the system deactivated,
the pilot would need to manually position the propeller-control lever of the failed
engine to the “feather” position to feather the propeller blades. Because of the impact
damage to the cockpit propeller-lever controls, it was not possible to determine their
preimpact positions. However, postaccident examination of the right propeller assembly
revealed that the blades were at high angles at impact, which is consistent with a feather
or near-feather condition. Also, the autofeather system had been inoperative since the
operator acquired the airplane in 2001, and its deactivated status was placarded in the
cockpit; therefore, the pilot (who also operated Skydive Quantum Leap) was likely aware
of the discrepancy. Further, the airplane was originally certificated without an autofeather
system, and the airplane’s published emergency procedures, which were available to the
pilot in the cockpit, correctly indicated the procedure for feathering the propeller without
the autofeather system. Therefore, the Safety Board concludes that, although the airplane’s
autofeather system, had it been operative, would have helped the pilot promptly feather
16 In addition, to help operators implement effective pilot training programs, on September 16, 2008,
the Safety Board issued Safety Recommendation A‑08‑67 that asked the FAA to “[r]evise the guidance
materials contained in Advisory Circular 105‑2C, Sport Parachute Jumping, to include guidance for parachute
jump operators in implementing effective initial and recurrent pilot training and examination programs that
address, at a minimum, operation‑ and aircraft‑specific weight and balance calculations, preflight inspections,
emergency procedures, and parachutist egress procedures.” Also, on September 16, 2008, the Safety Board
issued Safety Recommendation A‑08‑70 that asked that the USPA do the following: “Once Advisory Circular
(AC) 105‑2C has been revised to include guidance for parachute jump operators in implementing effective
initial and recurrent pilot training and examination programs that address, at a minimum, operation‑ and
aircraft‑specific weight and balance calculations, preflight inspections, emergency procedures, and parachutist
egress procedures, distribute this revised AC to your members and encourage adherence to its guidance.”
Safety Recommendations A‑08‑65, A‑08‑67, and A‑08‑70 are each classified “Open—Await Response.”
17 Safety Recommendation A‑08‑66 is classified “Open—Await Response.”
18 The accident airplane was modified with a propeller autofeather system, which, according to the
airplane’s flight manual, is designed to “automatically feather the propeller of an underpowered engine when
a decrease in torque to 13 [to] 11 [pounds per square inch] is detected … .” Examination of the airplane at the
accident site, however, revealed that the autofeather system switch was placarded “DEACTIVATED.”
7
National Transportation Safety Board

Aircraft Accident
Investigation and Analysis Summary Report
the propeller of the inoperative engine, there is insufficient evidence to suggest that the
inoperative autofeather system was a factor in the accident.
2.3 Intersection Takeoff Considerations
The pilot elected to perform the departure from an intersection location that left
only 1,700 feet of the 4,500‑foot runway available; photographic evidence shows that the
airplane, at one point, was above the runway and near the departure end with flames
and smoke visible on the right engine. Because the airplane had already achieved a speed
above V when the engine lost power, the pilot’s decision to continue the flight was
mc
appropriate, according to the published emergency procedures for the airplane, regardless
of available runway. However, page 12-18 of the FAA’s Airplane Flying Handbook points
out that a loss of engine power during takeoff is a critical emergency because altitude and
time are minimal and that “it is paramount [for the pilot] to maintain airplane control
and comply with the manufacturer’s recommended emergency procedures.” According
to the airplane flight manual, the emergency procedures for configuring the airplane are
to be performed if “a decision is made to continue the takeoff.” A decision to discontinue
a takeoff and land the airplane following a loss of engine power at an airspeed above
V would be up to the discretion of the pilot based, in part, on the pilot’s assessment of
mc
available runway.
Because the accident airplane’s airspeed and altitude at the time that the engine
problem could have first been detected is not known, precise estimates of runway
requirements to land the accident airplane following the loss of power cannot be
determined. However, available witness and photographic information and performance
information provided by the airplane’s current type‑certificate holder indicate that had the
entire 4,500-foot runway been used, the airplane could have been landed straight ahead on
the remaining runway following the loss of engine power but it might have overrun the
end of the runway before coming to a stop within the airport boundary. The Safety Board
concludes that the pilot’s decision to use only 1,700 feet of the available runway diminished
the margin of safety during takeoff because it eliminated the option of discontinuing the
takeoff and performing a straight-ahead, emergency landing on the runway.
2.4 Operator Information
2.4.1 General
Skydive Quantum Leap was corporately owned and operated by the accident
pilot since November 1993 and carried an estimated 10,000 to 12,000 parachutists per year,
with a maximum of about 15,000 parachutists carried in 1 year. The accident airplane,
which was owned by a limited liability company controlled by the accident pilot, was the
operator’s only airplane. Although the accident flight carried revenue parachutists, it was
operated under Part 91 because 14 CFR 119.1(e) (6) exempts nonstop parachute operations
8
National Transportation Safety Board

Aircraft Accident
Investigation and Analysis Summary Report
flights conducted within a 25‑mile radius of the departure airport from the rules that
govern air carriers and other commercial operators.
The accident pilot, age 42, held an airline transport pilot certificate with a rating
for multiengine land airplanes and commercial privileges for single-engine land airplanes.
He held a first‑class airman medical certificate, issued June 8, 2006, with no restrictions.
On his application for the medical certificate, the pilot reported that he had accumulated
6,000 total civilian flight hours, with 400 hours accumulated in the previous 6 months.
The pilot was properly certificated and qualified to perform the parachute operations
flight, and there was no evidence that any physiological or other impairment affected his
performance.
2.4.2 Maintenance Program for the Airplane
The operator used an independent maintenance facility to perform maintenance
and inspections on the airplane, which was maintained under an equalized maintenance
for maximum availability (EMMA) controlled inspection program.19 According to the
airplane’s maintenance logbooks, its most recent inspection was an EMMA check number
1620 completed on May 21, 2006, at an airframe total time of 37,434 hours.
Although evidence indicates that the operator followed the EMMA program for
inspecting the airplane at the prescribed intervals, the operator did not repair all the
discrepancies observed during the inspections. For example, the mechanic who performed
the most recent EMMA inspection recalled that the operator had not wanted him to repair
the airplane’s inoperative autofeather system, so the mechanic ensured that the system
was deactivated and that a “DEACTIVATED” placard was placed in the cockpit near
the autofeather switch. Because the operator did not have an FAA-approved minimum
equipment list (MEL) for the airplane, the operator was not authorized to dispatch
the airplane with any inoperative equipment.21 Further, an FAA-approved MEL, if the
19 The EMMA inspection program was designed to use work cards to inspect airplanes in 5 delineated
areas during 48 checks that take place every 125 flight hours. Special cards are included to address routine
inspections, airworthiness directives, corrosion inspections, and items affected by calendar rather than flying
hours.
20 According to the EMMA inspection record, the number 16 inspection work cards specify a detailed
grouping of tasks designed to inspect a wide variety of listed items on the airplane, such as specific airframe
and powerplant items; electrical, hydraulic, and fuel system items; and communication and navigation system
items, among others. The tasks include inspecting the specified items for security, condition, freedom of
movement, cleanliness, corrosion, function, and operability, and the cards specify the removal, reinstallation,
and/or replacement of items, as indicated.
21 According to 14 CFR 91.213, no person may take off in a turbine‑powered airplane with inoperative
instruments or equipment installed unless an FAA‑approved MEL exists for that airplane and the airplane has
within it a letter of authorization from the local flight standards district office (FSDO) authorizing its operation
under the MEL. A review of records on file at the St. Louis, Missouri, FSDO revealed that the operator had no
letter of authorization or MEL on file for the accident airplane.
9
National Transportation Safety Board

Aircraft Accident
Investigation and Analysis Summary Report
operator had obtained one for
the airplane, would have limited
operation of the airplane to a
maximum of 10 consecutive
calendar days with an inoperative
autofeather system.22
The airplane had been
modified from its original
configuration to accommodate
parachute operations; these
modifications included the
removal of the original cabin seats
and installation of parachutists’
restraints attached to the sidewalls
of the cabin. Examination of the
wreckage revealed that the accident
airplane’s cabin configuration
differed from that which was
specified in the FAA’s records
for the airplane. For example,
according to an FAA Form 337,23
dated October 5, 2000, the airplane
was modified with two straddle
benches, which, according to
the information provided by the
Figure 3. Preaccident photograph of accident airplane designer, are structural, metal
interior showing both foam block benches and some benches that attach to the seat
left‑side restraints (view from left‑side cargo door, looking attachment points. However, the
forward); photograph provided by a relative of the pilot. straddle benches described in the
Form 337 were not observed in the
wreckage; instead, two solid foam blocks, each measuring about 5 to 6 feet long and 15 to
18 inches tall and wide, were in the airplane. Each solid foam block served as a seating
bench that extended aft from the forward cabin, parallel to each exterior cabin wall. The
position of the two foam block benches allowed space for a center aisle and space between
each bench and sidewall. (See figure 3 above.)
22 For FAA approval, a MEL must be no less restrictive than the FAA’s master minimum equipment
list (MMEL) for that aircraft. According to the MMEL for DHC‑6‑series airplanes, the autofeather system is
considered a “Category C” item, which means that it must be repaired within 10 consecutive calendar days,
excluding the day the malfunction was recorded in the aircraft maintenance record or logbook.
23 An FAA Form 337 is used as part of the field approval process for approving a major repair or alteration
of an aircraft. An applicant wishing to perform a major repair or alteration must submit to the local FSDO a
completed FAA Form 337 that identifies the aircraft by serial number, describes the intended modification,
and includes any applicable engineering drawings and/or other data, such as a flight manual supplement,
pertinent to the change. FSDO inspectors review the submitted information, and, depending on the scope and
complexity of the proposed modification, the FSDO may approve the proposed modifications as presented,
request more data and support from the applicant, or forward the data to the aircraft certification office for
further review.
10
National Transportation Safety Board

Aircraft Accident
Investigation and Analysis Summary Report
A review of the airplane’s maintenance records revealed that the removal of the
straddle benches was not documented. Although there is no evidence this undocumented
configuration or the inoperative autofeather system contributed to the accident, such
discrepancies are not consistent with FAA airworthiness requirements; therefore, the
operator should not have dispatched the accident airplane until the discrepancies were
resolved.
One method by which the FAA can detect and require an operator to correct
aircraft airworthiness discrepancies is through direct surveillance visits to the operator.
However, a review of FAA Program Tracking and Reporting Subsystem data and Safety
Performance Analysis System data showed no record of FAA inspectors conducting
any maintenance or operations surveillance visits to the operator.24 The Safety Board
notes that, in the absence of surveillance, the operator was able to repeatedly dispatch
the airplane in an unairworthy condition and that, had an FAA inspector observed the
discrepancies, the airplane likely would have been grounded until the repairs were made.
Therefore, the Safety Board concludes that greater FAA surveillance of the operator
would have discouraged improper aircraft maintenance procedures, such as dispatching
the airplane with an inoperative autofeather system and an undocumented cabin seating
configuration.
In fact, the Safety Board’s 2008 special investigation25 identified a number of
parachute operations airplanes that had open maintenance discrepancies at the time that
they crashed. As a result, the Safety Board issued Safety Recommendation A-08-68 on
September 16, 2008, that asked the FAA to do the following:
Require direct surveillance of parachute jump operators to include, at a
minimum, maintenance and operations inspections.26
24 The records did show three FAA contacts with the operator related to the operator’s airspace waiver
requests.
25 See NTSB/SIR‑08/01.
26 Safety Recommendation A‑08‑68 is classified “Open—Await Response.”
11
National Transportation Safety Board

Aircraft Accident
Summary Report
3. s i
AFety ssues
3.1 Accident Survivability
Only two of the seven parachutists survived the accident even though the airplane
was equipped with parachutists’ restraints and the cabin area in which all the parachutists
were seated showed little crush
intrusion. In fact, the crush damage
observed on the wreckage showed
that only the space where the
pilot was seated was subjected to
nonsurvivable crush intrusion.
The airplane’s nose,27 cockpit, and
cabin were crushed aft to an area
immediately forward of the second
window in the cabin passenger
compartment. (See figure 4.)
The survival of the two
parachutists indicates that the
forces generated during the crash
sequence were survivable. Several
sources of information, such as
witness estimates of the airplane’s
height above the ground (ranging
from 50 to 150 feet) at the onset of
the dive, estimates of vertical speed
derived from the airplane’s vertical
speed indicator at the accident site,
the extent of crush damage observed
on the wreckage, and the depth of
the ground impact crater, were
used when performing various
load analyses. These analyses
showed that the peak deceleration
was between 6.6 G28 and 19.7 G
and that final velocity was between
40.1 and 69.5 feet per second; these
Figure 4. Photograph of the crush damage on the
ranges fall within survivable limits
fuselage (right wing removed from wreckage).
outlined in the Safety Board’s 1985
General Aviation Crashworthiness
27 The airplane’s nose is not structural; it is constructed of balsawood and composite materials.
28 One G is equivalent to the acceleration caused by the earth’s gravity (32.174 feet/second2).
12
National Transportation Safety Board

Aircraft Accident
Safety Issues Summary Report
Project report.29 In addition, the cabin area in which all of the parachutists were seated was
aft of the area of direct crush intrusion observed on the airplane.
Because of the near-vertical orientation of the airplane at impact, most of the
crash load forces were directed along the longitudinal axis of the airplane. As a result,
the parachutists traveled primarily forward—toward the front of the cabin—during the
crash sequence, and some of the parachutists entered the area of intrusion. The level of
injury for each parachutist was affected by restraint use, surfaces impacted, and impacts
received from other restrained and unrestrained parachutists in the cabin.
3.1.1 Single-Point Restraints in the Accident Airplane
According to preaccident photographs of the airplane’s interior and to information
recovered from two onboard video cameras worn on the helmets of two of the parachutists,
the airplane’s cabin was equipped with 20 sets of sidewall-mounted webbing restraint
systems for parachutists (10 sets on the left sidewall and 10 on the right).30 This type of
single-point restraint is designed to pass through the parachute harness, anchoring the
parachutist to a single point on the airplane’s sidewall using the sidewall-mounted seat
tracks.
3.1.2 Parachutists’ Seating Locations, Restraint Use, and Injuries
The parachutists—three solo parachutists and two tandem pairs (one
parachutist‑in‑command and one passenger parachutist per pair)—all sat facing aft at
the time of the crash.31 The three solo parachutists sat on the floor, and each tandem
pair straddled one of the foam block benches in the forward cabin. (See figure 5 on the
following page.) According to company practice, this seating arrangement was typical.
The foam block benches allow easier harnessing for the tandem pairs by enabling a more
upright seated position than provided by the airplane’s floor. According to company
practice, tandem pairs usually harness together about 2 to 5 minutes before jumping from
the airplane.
All of the parachutists had restraints accessible from their seated locations.
According to company practice, all parachutists are restrained before the airplane moves;
however, no specific instructions are provided to parachutists regarding which restraint
to use or how tightly to fasten it. Parachutists typically route the restraints through the
vertical (main lift) webbing or the leg webbing of their parachute harnesses.
29 For more information, see National Transportation Safety Board, General Aviation Crashworthiness
Project Phase III: Acceleration Loads and Velocity Changes of Survivable General Aviation Accidents, Safety
Report NTSB/SR‑85/02 (Washington, DC: NTSB, 1985).
30 An FAA Form 337 dated April 17, 2000, indicated that 22 sets of seatbelt restraints for parachutists
were installed. Only 20 sets were identified in the videos, the preaccident photographs, and the postaccident
photographs. It is unknown if these additional restraints were present at some time. The characteristics of the
identified restraints appeared consistent with the descriptions provided on the Form 337.
31 Video evidence indicated that two of the parachutists in the aft cabin initially faced forward during
takeoff but later repositioned and sat on the floor facing aft.
13
National Transportation Safety Board

Aircraft Accident
Safety Issues Summary Report
3.1.2.1 Tandem pair seated on
the right
One tandem pair sat
straddling the foam block
bench on the right side. The
parachutist-in-command wore
a tandem parachute, and his
seating position was the most
forward (closest to the front of the
cabin) of the parachutists seated
on the right side of the airplane.
His passenger-parachutist sat in
close proximity and immediately
aft of his position; she wore
a tandem passenger harness
with no parachute. Analysis of
postaccident restraint damage
evidence, including a break in the
attachment track at the normally
installed location of one restraint
and the pulled appearance of
the attachment pin of a second
restraint that was also missing one
side, suggests that each member
of this pair likely used a restraint.
Also, the close proximity of this
pair while seated on the foam block
Figure 5. Seating diagram showing the approximate bench, as observed from an onboard
preaccident locations of the parachutists and the pilot with video, suggests that they may have
respect to the crush‑intrusion line. harnessed together before takeoff,
although this would be inconsistent
with company practice.
The parachutist‑in‑command did not survive the accident. His injuries included a
cervical fracture, bilateral rib fractures, and blunt chest trauma, suggesting that the loose,
single-point restraint enabled considerable forward motion of his upper body and head,
exposing him to large forces and allowing him to enter the intrusion area and impact
surfaces there. Further, he was impacted by his tandem partner. His tandem partner,
however, survived the accident. Her injuries, which were serious, included a cervical
fracture, multiple minor lumbar spinal fractures, and a right clavicle fracture. She likely
benefited from her restraint and from the impact attenuation achieved by having another
person coupled to her back acting as a barrier between her and the cabin crush intrusion.
She was also likely not impacted by parachutists seated aft of her location because the
parachutist seated on the floor directly aft of her location was restrained.
14
National Transportation Safety Board

Aircraft Accident
Safety Issues Summary Report
3.1.2.2 Tandem pair seated on the left
Like the tandem pair just described, the pair on the left side of the airplane sat
straddling a foam block bench. The parachutist-in-command wore a tandem parachute,
and his seating position was the most forward of the parachutists seated on the left side
of the airplane. His passenger-parachutist sat in close proximity and immediately aft
of his position; she wore a tandem passenger harness with no parachute. Analysis of
postaccident restraint damage, including elongation deformation of the attachment ring
on one restraint, suggests that at least one member of this pair likely used a restraint.
Although a second restraint showed damage, that damage did not clearly indicate use. As
with the other tandem pair, the seated proximity of the members of this pair suggests that
they may have harnessed together before takeoff.
Neither member of this pair survived. Although the parachutist-in-command
was likely restrained (either independently or through his attached tandem partner) his
injuries, which included blunt pelvic trauma, suggest that the loose restraint allowed him
to be exposed to large forces and to impact the surfaces in the intrusion area. He was also
impacted by his tandem partner. Although the partner, too, was likely restrained (likely
to the sidewall) and likely benefited from the impact attenuation achieved by having
another person coupled to her back, she was likely impacted by at least one of two likely
unrestrained parachutists seated in the aft cabin. Her injuries, which included bilateral
pelvic fractures, kidney and liver lacerations, multiple lower extremity fractures, and
multiple fractures of the lumbar spine, may have resulted from an impact from at least
one other parachutist and from the failure of the loose, single-point restraint to adequately
restrain her.
3.1.2.3 Three solo parachutists
One parachutist sat on the floor on the right side of the airplane just aft of the
foam block bench on which a tandem pair was seated. She was in a semi-reclined position
with her parachute leaning against the end of the foam block bench. According to video
evidence, she appeared to have restraint webbing routed through the left-leg portion of
her parachute harness. Although she was restrained, she did not survive the accident. Her
injuries, which included a fracture at the base of the skull and a thoracic spine fracture,
likely resulted from the failure of the loose, single-point restraint to adequately restrain
her and from the impact received from the likely unrestrained parachutist seated on the
right side of the airplane aft of her position.
Another parachutist, according to video evidence, initially looked out the left side
cargo door but, after the engine noise changed (which was audible on the video), sat on the
floor on the left side of the airplane and appeared to lean backward against his parachute
in a semi-reclined position. There was no evidence that he used a restraint, and he did not
survive the accident. His injuries, which included closed head trauma, blunt chest trauma,
and blunt abdominal trauma, suggest that, because he was seated a distance aft of the
passenger-parachutist seated forward of his position on the left, he likely traveled a large
distance before impacting her and/or a surface, resulting in high impact forces. Despite
the attenuation of these forces through impacts with the other parachutist, he also likely
15
National Transportation Safety Board

Aircraft Accident
Safety Issues Summary Report
traveled into the area of intrusion. Therefore, his lack of restraint use, along with a lack of
support forward of his seating position, contributed to his fatal injuries.
Another parachutist, according to video evidence, initially leaned toward the left
cargo door but, after the engine noise changed, eventually sat on the floor in the aft cabin on
the right side of the airplane (aft of the restrained solo parachutist). There was no evidence
that he used a restraint; however, he survived the accident. His injuries, which were serious
and included a concussion, multiple thoracic and lumbar spinal fractures, complete spinal
cord injury, and blunt chest trauma, suggest that he impacted the restrained parachutist
forward of his position on the right and possibly also the passenger-parachutist on the
left. Colliding with other parachutists may have absorbed some of his impact energy,
thus, reducing the forces experienced by his body during the crash. Also, he was not
impacted by other parachutists because none were seated aft of his position.
3.2 Restraint Performance
Only one of the five parachutists who were likely restrained survived the accident.
Historically, parachutists have fared poorly during parachute operations airplane crashes
because they do not have the crash protection provided by typical aircraft passenger
seat structures and passenger seatbelts. As a result of the Safety Board’s investigation
of several parachute operations accidents, the Board issued safety recommendations in
1994 regarding parachutists’ seating and restraints.32 In response to the recommendations,
the FAA’s Civil Aerospace Medical Institute (CAMI), in conjunction with the Parachute
Industries Association and the USPA,33 performed a series of dynamic sled tests to evaluate
various types of restraint systems for parachutists and published a report on its findings.34
The restraint systems evaluated included both single-point systems and dual-point
systems intended for aft‑facing, floor‑seated occupants. All of the systems tested were
designed to pass through the parachute harness and attach to the aircraft floor.
Tests involving single-point restraint systems, such as those installed on the
accident airplane, showed poor kinematics of the test dummies. The results of the sled
32 On February 17, 1994, the Safety Board issued Safety Recommendation A‑94‑16, which asked
the FAA to do the following: “In conjunction with industry, the United States Parachute Association, and the
Civil Aerospace Medical Institute, develop and test universal restraint systems capable of providing adequate
protection to parachutists similar to that provided for seated passengers.” The FAA responded on March 26,
1999, that testing identified possible improvements in restraining parachutists and that it is not possible to
provide the same level of protection afforded to occupants in seats. Because the FAA’s actions met the intent
of Safety Recommendation AS‑94‑16, the Safety Board classified it “Closed—Acceptable Action” on January
4, 2000. The full text of the safety recommendation letter (which references several accidents), is available on
the Board’s website at <http://www.ntsb.gov/Recs/letters/1994/A94_16_19.pdf>.
33 On February 17, 1994, the Safety Board also issued Safety Recommendation A‑94‑22, which asked
the USPA to do the following: “Participate in the design, development, and testing of a universal restraint system
that would provide adequate protection for parachutists seated on an aircraft floor.” The USPA participated,
as requested, in CAMI’s restraint testing. Therefore, the Board classified Safety Recommendation A‑94‑22
“Closed—Acceptable Action” on June 5, 2001.
34 See U.S. Department of Transportation, Federal Aviation Administration, Civil Aerospace Medical
Institute, Evaluation of Improved Restraint Systems for Sport Parachutists, DOT/FAA/AM‑98/11 (Washington,
DC: DOT/FAA, 1998).
16
National Transportation Safety Board

Aircraft Accident
Safety Issues Summary Report
test for one single-point restraint design,35 which attached around the near side of the
parachutist’s back strap, noted the following:
During the impact, the [dummy] slid forward significantly, then violently
rotated counterclockwise about the center of the pelvis. The upper torso
rotated forward to 40 degrees from vertical and the legs flailed about the
vertical axis to a position 90 degrees from initial.
Like the test sled configuration, the accident airplane’s configuration provided no
support for the upper body, enabling each restrained parachutist’s upper body to rotate
toward the front of the airplane during the impact sequence. As in the test findings, some of
the parachutists in the accident airplane who used the single-point restraints experienced
harmful movement, such as large translational and rotational motion. Lack of support for
the upper body and head, slack in the restraints, and any restraint and/or harness stretch
during the accident sequence enabled forward motion of each restrained parachutist into
the region of intrusion and/or into other parachutists. These types of issues contributed to
the severity of the injuries sustained by the five parachutists who were likely restrained.
Load calculations indicate that this accident was survivable for some parachutists;
yet only two parachutists survived the crash. As stated previously, had the parachutists
been securely restrained in their seating positions, all of the parachutists would have been
away from the areas of major crush and intrusion. Based on the results of CAMI’s past
testing and the serious and fatal injuries sustained by some of the restrained parachutists
in this crash, the Safety Board concludes that a single‑point restraint system is not sufficient
to provide adequate restraint for parachutists. The Board further concludes that more
parachutists may have survived, and injuries may have been reduced, if more effective
restraints had been used.
The results of the CAMI tests revealed that dual-point restraint systems were
superior to single-point restraints.36 However, the CAMI tests for the dual-point restraints
were conducted with the restraints mounted to the floor and attached symmetrically to
the parachute harness system. The accident airplane, which had sidewall attachment
tracks, was not configured for a symmetrical, dual‑point system; other common seating
arrangements on parachute operations aircraft likely also have attachment configurations
that differ from the symmetrical dual-point design tested by CAMI. Although the absence
of test data specific to the accident airplane’s configuration precludes a determination of
the optimal dual-point restraint design for that airplane, the Safety Board concludes that
testing could identify the best method for dual-point restraint for the accident airplane’s
configuration and for the configurations of other airplanes commonly used in parachute
operations. Therefore, the Safety Board believes that the FAA should conduct research, in
conjunction with the USPA, to determine the most effective dual‑point restraint systems
for parachutists that reflects the various aircraft and seating configurations used in
parachute operations. The Safety Board also believes that the USPA should work with the
35 The tested design anchored the parachutist tautly to the floor, whereas the accident airplane’s
restraints anchored the parachutists loosely to the sidewall.
36 The results also concluded that survival may be improved by providing head support, by anchoring
the restraint at a specific point, and by bracing in a specific manner for impact.
17
National Transportation Safety Board

Aircraft Accident
Safety Issues Summary Report
FAA to conduct research to determine the most effective dual-point restraint systems for
parachutists that reflects the various aircraft and seating configurations used in parachute
operations. In addition, the Board notes that FAA Advisory Circular (AC) 105‑2C, Sport
Parachute Jumping, is an established source of guidance containing suggestions for
improving the safety of parachute jump operations, including information for operators
about modifying aircraft for parachute operations. However, AC 105-2C contains little
information about restraint systems beyond the statement that “seatbelts must be provided
to each person, and their installation must be approved.” Therefore, the Safety Board
believes that, once the most effective dual-point restraint systems for parachutists are
determined, the FAA should revise AC 105-2C to include guidance information about
these systems. Further, the Safety Board believes that, once the most effective dual-point
restraint systems for parachutists are determined, the USPA should educate its members on
the findings and encourage them to use the most effective dual‑point restraint systems.
18
National Transportation Safety Board

Aircraft Accident
Summary Report
4. C
onClusions
4.1 Findings
1. Although damage to the accident airplane’s right engine precludeded termination of
the initial event that precipitated the overload fracturing of the compressor turbine
blades, and although the operator was not required to comply with the engine
manufacturer’s service bulletins, it is possible that the initiating fracture event within
the engine resulted from a condition that could have been detected and corrected
during an engine overhaul performed within the manufacturer’s recommended time
between overhauls.
2. Although engine wear would have likely prevented the accident airplane from
obtaining its maximum published single-engine climb performance, the pilot’s failure
to maintain airspeed, according to the technique specified in the published emergency
procedures following the loss of power in one engine, negated any possibility of
continued, controlled flight that could have allowed for a return to the airport or other
suitable landing area.
3. Although the airplane’s autofeather system, had it been operative, would have helped
the pilot promptly feather the propeller of the inoperative engine, there is insufficient
evidence to suggest that the inoperative autofeather system was a factor in the
accident.
4. The pilot’s decision to use only 1,700 feet of the available runway diminished the
margin of safety during takeoff because it eliminated the option of discontinuing the
takeoff and performing a straight-ahead, emergency landing on the runway.
5. Greater Federal Aviation Administration surveillance of the operator would have
discouraged improper aircraft maintenance procedures, such as dispatching the
airplane with an inoperative autofeather system and an undocumented cabin seating
configuration.
6. Based on the results of the Civil Aerospace Medical Institute’s past testing and the
serious and fatal injuries sustained by some of the restrained parachutists in this
crash, a single‑point restraint system is not sufficient to provide adequate restraint for
parachutists.
7. More parachutists may have survived, and injuries may have been reduced, if more
effective restraints had been used.
8. Testing could identify the best method for dual-point restraint for the accident
airplane’s configuration and for the configurations of other airplanes commonly used
in parachute operations.
19
National Transportation Safety Board

Aircraft Accident
Conclusions Summary Report
