Aviation Investigation Report
AIR-25-07
October 27, 2025 Aviation Investigation Report AIR-25-07
Ensure Learjet Main Landing Gear Are
Securely Attached
Introduction
The National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB) is providing the following
information to urge the Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) to immediately act on
the safety recommendations in this report concerning the potential for incorrectly
attached main landing gear on certain Learjet airplanes to separate from the wing
structure during landing. We identified this issue during our ongoing investigation of
a fatal runway excursion involving a Learjet 35A, N81VN, while landing at Scottsdale
Airport (SDL), Scottsdale, Arizona, on February 10, 2025. Additional support for the
recommendations in this report is derived from our review of investigations and
reports of three prior events involving incorrectly attached main landing gear on
Learjet airplanes. The NTSB is issuing one urgent safety recommendation and one
non-urgent safety recommendation to the FAA.
Background and Analysis
On February 10, 2025, about 1438 mountain standard time, a Learjet 35A,
N81VN, was landing on runway 21 at SDL when it departed the left side of the runway
and impacted a parked Gulfstream G200.1 The Learjet’s captain was fatally injured,
the first officer (FO) and one passenger were seriously injured, and one passenger
received minor injuries; additionally, an occupant inside the parked airplane, which
was not operating at the time, sustained serious injuries. The Learjet was substantially
damaged. The corporate flight was operating under the provisions of Title 14 Code
of Federal Regulations (CFR) Part 91.
A witness at a golf course near the final approach path captured an 11-second
video showing the airplane on final approach with the left landing gear trailing aft
from its normal position. Figure 1 shows still images from the video of the accident
1 Visit ntsb.gov to find additional information in the public docket for this ongoing NTSB
investigation (case number WPR25FA088). Use the CAROL Query to search safety recommendations
and investigations.
1

Aviation Investigation Report
AIR-25-07
approach compared to a photograph of the airplane from a previous flight.
Evaluation of the video indicated that the strut was facing aft.2
Figure 1. Still images from a witness-supplied video showing the left landing gear askew
while on approach to the runway, compared with a prior photo of the accident airplane
(Source of previous flight photo: www.jetphotos.com).
A review of airport surveillance videos and automatic dependent surveillance –
broadcast (ADS-B) data indicate that at 1438:16, the airplane touched down on
2 A circular bright spot can be seen on the bottom of the left-wing flap above the dangling left
landing gear strut. The appearance of the bright spot is consistent with it being illuminated from the
left landing gear light, which normally illuminates in the forward direction; however, the location of the
bright spot in the video suggests the strut is facing aft.
2

Aviation Investigation Report
AIR-25-07
runway 21 just before the aiming point markings with full flaps extended.3 The
airplane immediately entered a left-wing-low attitude and began veering left, exiting
the runway surface. The airplane traveled over the rock-covered runway safety areas
located between the runway and taxiways. The left main landing gear separated from
the airplane and came to rest, as shown in figure 2, adjacent to taxiway B. The
airplane crossed taxiway B, collided with a windsock, and entered the ramp area
where it struck the right side of the parked Gulfstream G200 (see figure 3). The
airplane was not equipped with thrust reversers and the drag chute was not
deployed.4
Figure 2. Left main landing gear at the accident site with inset diagram of the landing gear
assembly (Inset source: Bombardier).
3 According to the FAA, ADS-B uses GPS satellite signals to provide air traffic controllers and pilots
with accurate information that will help keep aircraft safely separated in the sky and on runways.
Aircraft transceivers receive GPS signals and use them to determine the aircraft’s precise position in
the sky, which is combined with other data and broadcast to other aircraft and air traffic control
facilities.
4 The drag chute is a pilot-deployed deceleration device designed to supplement wheel braking
by increasing aerodynamic drag during landing. On Learjet models not equipped with thrust
reversers, such as the Learjet 35A, the drag chute serves a similar purpose—helping to reduce landing
rollout distance, particularly on short or contaminated runways.
3

Aviation Investigation Report
AIR-25-07
Figure 3. Video excerpts showing the landing rollout to impact.
Each main gear assembly attaches to the airplane (wing) structure at three
points (indicated in figure 2): through the forward and aft trunnion pins (with striker
plates on the trunnions to actuate microswitches) and through the main gear
hydraulic actuator.5,6 Figure 4 provides an illustration of the left main gear assembly
and aft trunnion attachment in its correct configuration. During installation, the aft
trunnion pin is inserted through a bushing on the aft trunnion fitting (located on
spar 7), into the aft side of the trunnion casting.7,8 When properly positioned, holes in
the aft trunnion pin and the trunnion casting align, allowing a retaining bolt to be
5 A trunnion pin is a cylindrical pivot or shaft designed to allow rotation or serve as a hinge point
within a mechanical assembly. On airplane landing gear, a trunnion pin is often used to secure the
landing gear strut to the supporting structure.
6 Striker plates are mechanical contact surfaces that physically actuate microswitches indicating
gear position.
7 The trunnion casting refers to the entire structural component cast from metal that forms part of
the landing gear assembly.
8 Spar 7 refers to the primary longitudinal structural member running spanwise in a Learjet wing, in
a horizontal plane, to which the aft trunnion fitting of the main landing gear assembly is attached,
serving as the fixed load path for landing and retraction forces.
4

Aviation Investigation Report
AIR-25-07
inserted through both; shims on either side of the aft trunnion fitting ensure proper
alignment of the holes.9 The retaining bolt is then secured with a castellated nut and
cotter pin.
Figure 4. Accident parts composited into a schematic view of the left main landing gear
assembly (Inset source: Bombardier).
9 Shims are donut-shaped, thin, peelable laminated spacers used in aircraft assemblies to fine-tune
clearances and alignment during installation or maintenance.
5

Aviation Investigation Report
AIR-25-07
Preliminary findings in this ongoing investigation indicate that, months earlier,
the aft trunnion pin was not correctly installed when the main landing gear was
installed. The aft trunnion pin was inserted through the aft trunnion fitting but had not
been inserted far enough into the trunnion casting for the two holes to align. The
retaining bolt had been installed and secured in the aft trunnion casting without
going through the hole in the aft trunnion pin.
Postaccident examination of the left wheel well found the aft trunnion pin intact
and still positioned in the aft trunnion fitting on spar 7, though no forward shims were
present. Removal of the access panel adjacent to the aft trunnion fitting gave
investigators visual access to the trunnion pin’s shoulder and aft shims, which were
not making contact with the aft surface of the aft trunnion fitting. An excessive amount
of grease was piled below the pin (see figure 5).
Figure 5. Left main landing gear aft trunnion pin.
Note: The left photograph shows the area aft of spar 7; this area is not visible unless an access panel is
removed and remains very difficult to view even with the panel removed. The right photograph shows
the interior of the left wheel well.
More significantly, the on-scene examination found that the aft trunnion pin
was no longer seated within the aft trunnion casting: The aft trunnion casting
6

Aviation Investigation Report
AIR-25-07
remained intact on the left main gear, which, as previously mentioned, had separated
from the airplane. The retaining bolt—intended to pass through the aft trunnion pin to
secure the main gear strut to the airframe—was found intact on the left main landing
gear, inserted through its aft trunnion casting and secured with a castellated nut and
cotter pin (see figures 6 and 7). The absence of the aft trunnion pin (which remained
intact on the airplane) from the trunnion casting indicated that the retaining bolt was
secured to the aft trunnion casting without passing through the aft trunnion pin.
Figure 6. Left main landing gear aft trunnion casting at the accident site with white lines
indicating attachment of the retaining bolt and striker bracket.
7

Aviation Investigation Report
AIR-25-07
Figure 7. Left main landing gear aft trunnion pin and aft trunnion casting from the accident
airplane, with retaining bolt secured through the latter but not the former (Source [inset
diagram]: Bombardier).
On scene examination of the airplane found the left main gear’s forward
trunnion pin correctly assembled. The forward trunnion pin remained secured in the
forward trunnion casting. The left main gear actuator remained connected to the
8

Aviation Investigation Report
AIR-25-07
strut, but the inboard attachment point was no longer fastened to the airframe and
exhibited evidence of separation consistent with accident forces. The right main
landing gear remained attached to the airframe and was in the down and locked
position.
During further examination of the aft trunnion fitting, investigators measured
the distance between the shoulder of the aft trunnion pin and the aft surface of the aft
trunnion fitting. The aft trunnion pin’s shoulder was protruding off the aft trunnion
fitting by 1 3/8 in—a distance that corresponds to the depth within the aft trunnion
casing at which the retaining bolt is located (see figure 7).10 If the retaining bolt is
secured through the trunnion casting without engaging the trunnion pin in the
trunnion casing, as was found during the examination of the accident left main
landing gear assembly, then the trunnion pin’s grease hole (intended as an access
point for lubricating the bushing) will protrude aft of the bushing, allowing grease to
migrate into the wing bay behind spar 7. This scenario is consistent with the observed
excess grease piled below the trunnion pin in the wing bay behind spar 7.
When assembled correctly, the pin is fully inserted into the trunnion; therefore, the
pin’s shoulder head will sit flush against the surrounding wing strut structure/fitting.
When the retaining bolt is not inserted through the hole in the pin, the retaining bolt
prevents the pin from being (correctly) fully inserted into the trunnion. As shown in
figure 8, this obstruction results in the pin bearing against the retaining bolt rather
than seating fully within the trunnion, leaving the pin’s shoulder visibly protruding
from the aft spar surface.
10 As noted earlier, the trunnion casting refers to the entire structural component cast from metal
that forms part of the landing gear assembly. The trunnion casing refers specifically to the inner
cylindrical bore within the casting that receives the trunnion pin.
9

Aviation Investigation Report
AIR-25-07
Figure 8. Cross-sectional illustration of insecurely attached landing gear.
Note: For illustrative clarity, the retaining bolt is shown vertically. In actuality, the retaining bolt’s axis is
oriented perpendicular to the plane of the illustration (that is, it would be installed into the page).
According to postaccident interviews, the same flight crew for the accident
flight had a landing mishap with the same airplane on June 20, 2024, in McAlester,
Oklahoma.11 A video of the event revealed that the airplane landed hard just short of
the runway surface and bounced several times. As a result of the hard landing, both
left main landing gear tires burst. The captain hired a mechanic, who had worked on
the airplane during its previous ownership, to perform a hard landing inspection. This
work was completed several weeks after the event. The mechanic stated in a
postaccident interview that he followed the Learjet 35A maintenance manual for all of
the work he performed, which included removing both main landing gear to facilitate
the required inspections.
The Learjet maintenance manual specifies that installation of the main gear
strut begins by securing the forward trunnion pin. The mechanic then should raise the
strut so that the forward trunnion pin engages in the forward bearing. Thereafter, the
11 The NTSB did not receive a notification about this occurrence and did not open an investigation
for it.
10

Aviation Investigation Report
AIR-25-07
mechanic should align the trunnion with the aft trunnion fitting. Shims should be
placed onto the aft trunnion pin before inserting it into the trunnion fitting on the aft
side of spar 7; additional shims are then placed on the aft trunnion pin before
inserting it into the main gear strut’s aft trunnion casing, ensuring that there is no gap
at the attachment point between aft trunnion fitting’s forward surface and the
trunnion casing.
A temporary bolt is installed on the shoulder area of the aft trunnion pin to
check tolerances, after which the bolt is removed to insert the striker bracket. The
mechanic should then secure the retaining bolt (with attached Zerk-type grease
fitting) through the aft trunnion pin and trunnion casing with a nut and cotter pin on
the other side. Thereafter, grease is added through the retaining bolt’s grease fitting
to migrate through the pin and (by way of the aft trunnion pin’s grease hole) lubricate
the bushing.
Another mechanic who subsequently lubricated the landing gear in
December 2024 stated that nothing appeared unusual, but he remarked that the left
landing gear took an excessive amount of grease.
Prior events
During the course of this investigation, the NTSB learned of three prior events
in which Learjet landing gear disconnected from the airframe because the retaining
bolt was not engaged through the aft trunnion pin.
On October 4, 1995, the left main landing gear of a Learjet 25B airplane,
N47MR, collapsed during landing rollout at Will Rogers World Airport in Oklahoma
City, Oklahoma. The pilot was able to pull the airplane up and perform a go-around,
after which the pilot landed the airplane on the right main gear and nose gear. The
airplane sustained minor damage, and there were no injuries. During postincident
examination, it was discovered that the left main gear’s aft trunnion pin was
incorrectly installed and had backed out, allowing the gear to collapse (see figure 9).
11

Aviation Investigation Report
AIR-25-07
Figure 9. Composite of N47MR accident photos (Source: Jon Dudek).
On February 4, 2001, the left main gear of a Learjet 25B airplane, N48WA,
separated from the airframe shortly after touchdown at Saint Lucie County
International Airport, in Fort Pierce, Florida, and the airplane skidded off the left side
of the runway. According to the pilot, the airplane encountered a landing gear
retraction problem after takeoff. Unable to resolve this problem, the crew decided to
return to the departure airport for an emergency landing. The pilot reported that he
lost directional control after the airplane touched down. The airplane sustained
substantial damage; the pilot and crew were not injured. Examination of maintenance
records revealed that the landing gear assembly had been removed and reinstalled
during a recent maintenance procedure. The investigation determined that the
mechanic had failed to properly install and secure the left main landing gear aft
trunnion pin in accordance with procedures specified in the Learjet maintenance
manual.12
On March 28, 2008, a Learjet VU-35A airplane operated by the Brazilian Air
Force, FAB 2712, experienced a runway excursion after the left main landing gear
collapsed upon touchdown at Recife/Guararapes–Gilberto Freyre International
Airport in Recife, Brazil. The airplane sustained substantial damage; the three crew
members and four passengers were uninjured. A report by the Brazilian Aeronautical
Accident Prevention and Investigation Center, which investigated the accident,
determined that the left main landing gear did not retract after takeoff; instead, the
entire strut shifted backward. During landing, the pilot lost directional control of the
airplane. Postaccident examination found the left aft trunnion pin loose in the wing
12 Visit ntsb.gov to find additional information in the public docket for this NTSB investigation (case
number ATL01LA030).
12

Aviation Investigation Report
AIR-25-07
bay behind spar 7 without any signs of fracture or fatigue. The retaining bolt was
found intact and still fastened through the left main landing gear’s casting—having
been installed without engaging the aft trunnion pin (see figure 10).
Figure 10. VU-35 accident photos (Source: Aeronautical Accident Prevention and
Investigation Center of Brazil).
In response to on-scene findings at the Scottsdale accident, on March 7, 2025,
Bombardier issued a series of Learjet model-specific service bulletins (SBs), for
airplanes equipped with the same type of landing gear (that is, with aft trunnion pin
and retaining bolt); see table.
Table. Learjet models and corresponding postaccident service bulletins.
Model Service Bulletins
Learjet 23/24/25 A23/24/25-32-20
Learjet 28/29 A28/29-32-21
Learjet 31 A31-32-25
Learjet 35/36 A35/36-32-29
Learjet 55 A55-32-26
Learjet 60 A60-32-42
Each of these SBs recommend that operators, within the next 25 flight cycles,
remove the access panel on spar 7, confirm that the aft trunnion pin is seated flush
against the shim and bushing flange, ensure the retaining bolt is correctly installed
through the strut and trunnion pin, and correct any discrepancies before the next
flight.13
13 The bushing flange is a sleeve-type bearing with a widened collar, the inner surface of which
mates with the trunnion pin and the outer surface of which fits into the bore of the trunnion fitting.
13

Aviation Investigation Report
AIR-25-07
The NTSB notes that compliance with SBs is not mandatory. In July 2025, the
FAA’s Corrective Action Review Board made a final determination that no additional
FAA action is necessary for the Bombardier SBs. Consequently, the FAA has decided
that it will not issue an airworthiness directive (AD) requiring mandatory
implementation of the Bombardier SBs. We believe the FAA’s decision not to issue an
AD is incommensurate with the longstanding aviation safety risk associated with
misassembly of Learjet main landing gear, as documented in this report, dating as
early as 1995. The FAA’s decision is particularly difficult to justify in view of the
imminent risk of loss of life from a similar accident, the minimal effort required to
accomplish the SBs—an estimated 2 hours per airplane—and the fact that Bombardier
itself has urged the FAA to mandate compliance through an AD.
We furthermore note that according to Bombardier, only about 12% of the
1,883 in-service airplanes addressed by the SBs have reportedly completed the
inspection.
We are concerned that without a requirement to perform the inspection
procedures outlined in Bombardier’s March 7, 2025, SBs, Learjet airplanes may
continue to operate with improperly assembled main landing gear, since the insecure
attachment resulting from such misassembly is not readily detectable during routine
maintenance or preflight inspections. Given that installation of the aft trunnion pin
without engaging its retaining bolt can result in the landing gear separating from the
airplane during landing—thereby increasing the risk for loss of directional control and
runway excursion—the NTSB concludes that a one-time inspection of certain Learjet
models consistent with Bombardier’s March 7, 2025, service bulletins is necessary to
prevent main landing gear from collapsing as a result of misassembly in which the aft
trunnion pin retaining bolt is secured without passing through the pin.
Therefore, the NTSB recommends that the FAA require, as a condition of
continued airworthiness, operators and owners of applicable Learjet models to
comply with Bombardier Service Bulletins (SBs) A23/24/25-32-20, A28/29-32-21,
A31-32-25, A35/36-32-29, A55-32-26, and A60-32-42.
The NTSB is also concerned that Learjet maintenance manual procedures for
installing the main landing gear do not contain a step to ensure that the aft trunnion
pin is positioned correctly or that the retaining bolt is secured through it. In the
absence of a required verification step, a mechanic could inadvertently install the
retaining bolt without it passing through the trunnion pin, leaving the gear insecurely
attached to the airframe; such misassembly may enter service undetected, increasing
the risk of the main landing gear separating from the airplane during landing. The
manual should include steps to confirm, by direct visualization, that the aft trunnion
pin is seated flush against the shim and bushing flange, to ensure the retaining bolt is
correctly installed through the strut and trunnion pin, and to correct any
discrepancies. Therefore, the NTSB concludes that revision of Learjet maintenance
manual procedures for installation of the main landing gear to include an explicit
14

Aviation Investigation Report
AIR-25-07
procedural check that verifies correct engagement of the aft trunnion pin with its
retaining bolt would ensure that the main landing gear is securely attached to the
airframe.
Therefore, the NTSB recommends that the FAA require Bombardier to revise
the maintenance procedures for the applicable Learjet models to include a check of
the position of the aft landing gear trunnion pin and retaining bolt, following
maintenance on the gear that requires removal of the aft trunnion, to ensure that the
landing gear has been correctly attached to the airplane wing structure.
