June 18, 2025 Aviation Investigation Report AIR-25-03
Mitigations Concerning Load Reduction
Device Activation in CFM International
LEAP-1B Engines
Introduction
The National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB) is providing the following
information to urge the Federal Aviation Administration (FAA), the European Union
Aviation Safety Agency (EASA), the Civil Aviation Administration of China (CAAC),
CFM International, and Boeing to take action on safety recommendations in this
report. These recommendations address the potential for smoke to enter the cockpit
or cabin after activation of the load reduction device (LRD) resulting from an engine
blade failure or imbalance on CFM LEAP-1B engines and pilot awareness about what
to do if this occurs.1 We identified this issue during our ongoing investigation of an
incident involving Southwest Airlines flight 554, a Boeing 737-8, in which smoke filled
the cockpit after a bird was ingested into the left (No. 1) engine, a CFM LEAP-1B. The
NTSB is issuing an urgent safety recommendation to the FAA. In addition, we are
issuing two safety recommendations to the FAA and EASA and one safety
recommendation each to Boeing, CFM International, and the CAAC.
Background and Analysis
On December 20, 2023, about 1414 central standard time, Southwest Airlines
flight 554, a Boeing 737-8, was departing from Louis Armstrong New Orleans
International Airport (MSY), Kenner, Louisiana, when a bird was ingested into the left
(No. 1) engine, a CFM International LEAP-1B, during the initial climb (figure 1 shows
damage to the engine).2 The flight crew reported that, after an uneventful takeoff and
while climbing through about 1,000 ft, the first officer (FO), who was the pilot
monitoring, heard the captain say “bird.” This statement was followed immediately by
1 CFM International is a joint venture between GE Aerospace and Safran Aircraft Engines. The
LEAP-1B engine received joint type certification from the FAA and EASA in 2016.
2 Visit ntsb.gov to find additional information for this NTSB investigation (case number
DCA24LA330). Use the CAROL Query to search safety recommendations and investigations.
1

a “thump” on the left side of the airplane. The flight crew reported that the airplane
began to “shake violently with a distinct loss of thrust” in the No. 1 engine.
Figure 1. Close-up photo of damage to the left engine. (Source: Southwest Airlines)
The captain called for the Engine Fire or Engine Severe Damage or Separation
checklist in the Quick Reference Card (QRC). After the FO started the checklist, the
flight deck filled with “acrid white smoke”; the FO later stated that he could not clearly
see the captain. The FO called out “masks” and the pilots donned their masks and
resumed the checklist.
The flight crew declared an emergency to air traffic control and asked airport
rescue and firefighting to “roll the trucks.” The captain stated that visibility in the
cockpit was restricted and that he could see nothing beyond the FO. The captain also
stated that his instrument panel was difficult to see, so he thought he might need to
fly the airplane solely using the head-up guidance system.3 However, after the FO
3 The head-up guidance system is only on the captain’s side of the cockpit but contains all
necessary information to fly the airplane. If the cockpit is so full of smoke that the pilot flying cannot
see the instrumentation, the head-up guidance system may be the only source of information.
2

pulled the engine fire switch as directed by the QRC, the smoke began to rapidly
dissipate.
The flight crew notified the flight attendants about the emergency and made a
public address announcement to passengers that fire trucks would be meeting the
airplane. After landing at MSY, the airplane came to a full stop on the arrival runway.
After inspecting the airplane, the firefighters found no evidence of a fire. The flight
crew was cleared to taxi the airplane to the assigned gate and passengers deplaned
normally without further incident. None of the 139 occupants aboard the airplane
were injured, and the airplane sustained minor damage. The flight was operating
under the provisions of Title 14 Code of Federal Regulations Part 121 as a scheduled
domestic passenger flight from MSY to Tampa International Airport, Tampa, Florida.
According to the regulations requiring immediate reporting to the NTSB (at
Title 49 Code of Federal Regulations 830.5, Immediate Notification), Southwest
Airlines was not required to report the incident.4 Once informed by the FAA in
November 2024 about its ongoing investigation of the incident, and, in learning of
similarities to a March 2023 event in Havana, Cuba, the NTSB began an incident
investigation.5 Preliminary findings from our ongoing investigation indicate that
smoke entered the cockpit as a result of the activation of the LRD, an engine system
4 Among the events requiring immediate NTSB notification is "failure of an internal turbine
engine component that results in the escape of debris other than out the exhaust path." Since this
incident involved engine oil (which caused smoke) and not debris, it did not meet this notification
requirement. Another criterion for reporting is “in-flight fire,” but no fire was involved in this event, only
smoke.
5 On March 5, 2023, Southwest Airlines flight 3923 struck birds, damaging the right engine,
shortly after departure from Jose Marti International Airport, Havana, Cuba; the incident is discussed
later in this report. The lead investigative authority for this incident is the Instituto de Aeronáutica Civil
de Cuba (IACC). In accordance with the provisions of Annex 13 to the International Civil Aviation
Organization, the NTSB is participating in the investigation as an accredited representative for the
State of Manufacture, Design, Operator and Registry. As of the date of this report, the IACC has not
issued a final report for the Havana event.
3

design feature on CFM International LEAP-1B engines. The LRD minimizes aircraft
and engine damage during a fan blade failure or significant fan blade imbalance by
reducing the severity of the vibration transmitted from the damaged engine to the
airframe (see figure 2). The LRD does this by enabling the fan to be partially
mechanically disconnected from the turbomachinery. As a mechanical design
feature, the LRD does not require pilot intervention to activate.
Figure 2. The location of the LRD on the LEAP-1B engine. (Source: CFM)
Activation of the LRD in the MSY event caused tubes supplying oil to the
engine sump to become dislodged and the flange from the sump area to open,
which allowed oil to enter the core compressor upstream of the pneumatic bleed
ports that supply bleed air to the cabin and cockpit.6 The oil was exposed to high
temperatures and resulted in smoke and fumes that were then fed into the cockpit.7
When the FO pulled the engine fire switch, the smoke quickly dissipated because its
6 The high-pressure bleed air is bled from the engine to ensure an adequate cabin
pressurization level.
7 Conditioned air (bleed air) from the left air conditioning pack (supplied by the left engine) is
normally distributed to the flight deck. Conditioned air from the right air conditioning pack (supplied
by the right engine), excess air from the left air conditioning pack, and recirculated air are combined in
the mixing manifold and distributed to the cabin. In this incident, smoke entered the cockpit because
the left engine of the airplane was damaged. In the Havana incident, smoke entered the cabin because
the right engine was damaged.
4

point of access, the pressure regulating shutoff valve (PRSOV), automatically closed.8
Each engine has a PRSOV that, when closed, prevents bleed air from entering the
airplane (see figure 3).
Figure 3. Simplified engine bleed air diagram with PRSOV depicted. (Image
Copyright © Boeing. Reprinted with permission.)
Boeing released a flight crew operations manual (FCOM) bulletin on
February 9, 2024, that described the results of the bird ingestion in the MSY incident
and the actions a flight crew should take if they experience a similar incident. Boeing
also updated the system description in the Boeing 737-8 FCOM on November 15,
2024, and the quick reference handbook (QRH) on November 30, 2024, to include
engine failure with smoke or fumes in the flight deck or cabin as a condition to trigger
reference to the Engine Fire or Engine Severe Damage or Separation QRC.
In addition, on February 14, 2024, Southwest Airlines issued a Read Before Fly
brief to its pilots describing the event and incorporating Boeing’s updates from its
FCOM bulletin. The brief indicated that section 5.5.4 Engine Failure or Shutdown in
the aircraft operating manual would be updated to indicate that if smoke enters the
flight deck or cabin, flight crews should accomplish the Engine Fire or Engine Severe
Damage or Separation steps of the QRC.9
8 The PRSOV is normally open but closes automatically under any of the following conditions: if
the engine running relay is de-energized (spools down below 62% minimum N2), the engine start
switch lever is moved to cutoff, or the engine fire switch is pulled.
9 This update was completed March 28, 2024.
5

Southwest’s brief also described the similar event in Havana, Cuba, involving
Southwest Airlines flight 3923. Shortly after its departure, birds struck the airplane’s
right LEAP-1B engine, resulting in activation of the LRD and vapor fog entering the
passenger cabin. The flight crew declared an emergency and returned to the airport,
where they landed without further incident.
The NTSB is aware that CFM International, in collaboration with Boeing, has
begun work on an engine software design update that they anticipate completing in
the first quarter of 2026. The update will mitigate the presence of smoke or fumes in
the cockpit or airplane cabin by closing the PRSOV when the LRD activates. This
update will be entirely software-based and made available through a service bulletin
upon FAA certification.
The NTSB is also aware the FAA convened a corrective action review board in
November 2024 to evaluate the potential for smoke in the cockpit and cabin resulting
from LRD activation; the corrective action review board determined the issue did not
warrant immediate action and that any corrective action would be taken through the
usual regulatory process.10
The NTSB appreciates the plan to prevent or mitigate the potential effects of
LRD activation in LEAP-1B engines and understands that such a fix takes time.
However, we also note that, although the events discussed in this report involved bird
strike or ingestion, LRD activation can occur for many other reasons, including foreign
object debris ingestion, the loss of a fan blade or sufficiently large portion of a blade
tip to cause an imbalance, or the failure of the fan. Therefore, we remain concerned
that smoke intrusion into the cockpit as a result of LRD activation could reduce flight
crews’ visibility (making access to the QRH or relevant QRC more difficult), which
would quickly worsen an already high-workload situation.
The NTSB concludes that even though pilot action can mitigate the amount of
smoke released into the cockpit or cabin after LRD activation on CFM LEAP-1B
engines, CFM and Boeing’s planned software modification, once incorporated, would
likely close the PRSOV more quickly, thus minimizing the quantity of smoke and
reducing the flight crew’s workload. Therefore, the NTSB recommends that CFM
International and Boeing work together to complete the development and
certification for a software modification for CFM LEAP-1B engines that will prevent or
limit the amount of smoke released into the cockpit or cabin after LRD activation.
10 On April 16, 2025, the US Department of Transportation Office of Inspector General (OIG)
issued a memorandum to the FAA indicating that the OIG will conduct an audit to “assess FAA’s
actions in response to recent incidents of toxic smoke and fumes entering aircrafts’ cockpit or cabin
when load reduction devices are activated.” Review of FAA Actions to Address Risks From Load
Reduction Devices Activating in LEAP-1B Engines
6

The NTSB also recommends that the FAA and EASA, once CFM International
and Boeing complete the development and certification process for software
modifications to the CFM LEAP-1B engines, require all operators of airplanes
equipped with CFM LEAP-1B engines to incorporate the software modification
developed in response to Safety Recommendations A-25-13 and A-25-14 to prevent
or limit the amount of smoke released into the cockpit or cabin after LRD activation.
The NTSB is aware, based on conversations we have had with several pilots
who fly Boeing 737 airplanes equipped with CFM LEAP-1B engines, that some pilots
may not be fully aware of the MSY and Havana incidents despite Boeing’s QRH and
FCOM updates. Because of this and given the projected timeframe for completion of
CFM’s and Boeing’s planned modification and the time it will take to incorporate it,
the NTSB concludes that it is critical to ensure that pilots who fly airplanes equipped
with CFM LEAP-1B engines are fully aware of the potential for smoke in the cockpit if
the LRD is activated during a critical phase of flight (takeoff or landing). Therefore, the
NTSB recommends that the FAA ensure operators inform flight crews of airplanes
equipped with CFM LEAP-1B engines of the circumstances described in this report,
emphasizing Boeing’s changes to the QRH and FCOM so pilots are aware of actions
to take if they encounter smoke in the cockpit or cabin after LRD activation.
The NTSB is aware that LRDs are also part of LEAP-1A engines, which are
installed on Airbus A320neo airplanes, and LEAP-1C engines, which are installed on
Commercial Aircraft Corporation of China (COMAC) C919 airplanes.11 We are also
aware that the FAA, EASA, Airbus, and CFM are in the process of comparing and
assessing these and other LRD-equipped engine/airframe combinations to determine
if they are susceptible to smoke in the cockpit or cabin as a result of LRD activation.
The NTSB concludes that potential unintended effects of LRD activation on
other CFM LEAP engine models require comprehensive evaluation and, if needed,
remediation. Therefore, the NTSB recommends that the FAA, EASA, and CAAC work
with CFM International, Airbus, and COMAC to determine if CFM LEAP-1A or -1C
engines are at risk of smoke in the cockpit or cabin as a result of LRD activation and
require affected operators to incorporate any modification that results.
11 No COMAC C919 airplanes are operated in the United States.
7
