Aviation Investigation Report
NTSB/AIR-22-10
December 1, 2022 Aviation Investigation Report AIR-22-10
Require Immediate Inspection of Bell 407
Tail Boom Attachment Hardware and Fittings
Introduction
The National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB) is providing the following
information to urge the Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) and Transport Canada
to take immediate action on the safety recommendations in this report. We identified
this issue during our ongoing investigation of the June 8, 2022, accident involving a
Bell 407 helicopter, N402SH, which experienced an inflight separation of its tail boom
during cruise flight near Kalea, Hawaii. The NTSB is issuing two urgent safety
recommendations each to the FAA and Transport Canada.1
Background and Analysis
On June 8, 2022, about 1726 Hawaii-Aleutian standard time, a Bell 407
helicopter, N402SH, impacted terrain near Kalea, Hawaii, following an inflight
separation of the tail boom. The pilot and two passengers sustained serious injuries,
and three passengers sustained minor injuries. The helicopter sustained substantial
damage during the impact. The on-demand air tour flight was operated by Paradise
Helicopters under Title 14 Code of Federal Regulations Part 135.2
According to the pilot, about 30 minutes into the flight, the helicopter began
an uncontrolled spin to the right. A passenger reported that, as the helicopter
continued to spin, she observed something fall off the helicopter; however, she was
not able to identify a specific part. The helicopter continued to spin uncontrollably
while it descended and impacted an area of rough, uneven, lava-covered terrain.
The examination of the accident site revealed the tail boom came to rest about
762 ft northeast from the main wreckage, consistent with an inflight separation.
Examination of the tail boom revealed it separated from the fuselage at the tail boom
1 The recommendations are issued to both the FAA and Transport Canada because the FAA is
the regulator for US operators and Transport Canada is the regulator for the state of design and
manufacture of the helicopter. Both agencies have the authority to mandate such actions.
2 Visit ntsb.gov to find additional information in the public docket for this ongoing NTSB
investigation (case no. ANC22FA041). Use the CAROL Query to search safety recommendations and
investigations.
1

Aviation Investigation Report
NTSB/AIR-22-10
attach point. Figure 1 shows the location of separation and the attachment fittings
and hardware used to secure the tail boom to the fuselage.
The upper-left tail boom attachment hardware, consisting of a bolt, washers,
and a nut, was not present at the accident site and was not found. The attachment
fitting remained connected to the fuselage. Damage to the upper-left attachment bolt
holes indicates the bolt had been installed at some point before the accident flight; it
is unknown at this time when or why the bolt separated. Additionally, the lower-left,
lower-right, and upper-right tail boom attachment fittings (connecting the tail boom
to the aft fuselage) were fractured and found, along with their attachment hardware,
with the tail boom wreckage. The lower-left fitting had multiple fatigue fractures,
while the upper-right and lower-right attachment fittings had overload fractures. The
initiation of fatigue cracks on the lower-left fitting indicates that the tail boom did not
immediately separate from the helicopter upon the separation of the upper-left
attachment hardware.
Figure 1. Location of tail boom attach point and hardware used (Source: Bell and edited by
NTSB). Attachment hardware consists of a bolt, washers, and a nut.
Figure 2 shows the accident helicopter tail boom with the fractured remnants
of the upper-right, lower-left, and lower-right attachment fittings and their respective
attachment hardware. Figure 3 shows the upper-left tail boom attachment fitting
found with the main fuselage wreckage.
2

Aviation Investigation Report
NTSB/AIR-22-10
Figure 2. Tail boom with fractured remains of attachment fittings and hardware. Upper-left
attachment hardware (bolt, washers, and nut) was not present. The lower left, lower right, and
upper right attachment hardware (bolt, washers, and nut) remained installed.
3

Aviation Investigation Report
NTSB/AIR-22-10
Figure 3. Aft fuselage with upper-left tail boom attachment fitting.
According to Bell (the helicopter manufacturer), the upper-left tail boom
attachment fitting has the highest tension loading of the four attachment fittings and
is considered the most important of the four attachment fittings between the tail
boom and the aft fuselage. The upper-left tail boom attachment bolt separated first,
resulting in the redistribution of the load normally carried by the upper-left
attachment fitting to the remaining three attachment fittings and the subsequent
initiation of fatigue fractures on the lower-left attachment fitting. Based on preliminary
analysis of the fatigue crack growth on the lower-left attachment fitting, it is possible
that the fatigue crack grew over multiple takeoffs and landings. However, this analysis
is ongoing, and the results of the analysis, once completed, will be shared with the
FAA and the Transportation Safety Board of Canada.
The Bell 407 maintenance manual requires a torque check of the tail boom
attachment hardware and a visual inspection of the tail boom attachment fittings
every 300 hours.3 A review of the accident helicopter’s maintenance records revealed
that the most recent tail boom attachment hardware torque check and visual
inspection of the attachment fittings was completed 114.2 hours before the accident
3 A torque check involves checking the tightness of the hardware, as installed, to ensure it
continues to retain the required torque. Hardware that has not retained torque typically requires
disassembly and inspection or replacement.
4

Aviation Investigation Report
NTSB/AIR-22-10
occurred with no anomalies noted during the visual inspection and no noted loss of
torque of the attachment hardware (attachment hardware that is not installed
properly, is cracked and/or is near an impending failure could exhibit a loss of
installation torque and not pass a torque check). Furthermore, no additional
maintenance had been conducted to the attachment hardware since the last torque
check.
Our investigation into this accident is ongoing. However, given the findings
thus far during the investigation, we are concerned that there may be additional
Bell 407 helicopters with missing or fractured tail boom attachment hardware, and
the potential for catastrophic failure warrants immediate and mandatory action. The
NTSB concludes that any tail boom attachment hardware or fittings that is not
installed properly or is fractured is a safety hazard because it can result in an inflight
separation of the tail boom, which is catastrophic. Therefore, the NTSB recommends
that the FAA and Transport Canada require operators of Bell 407 helicopters to
conduct an immediate torque check of the tail boom attachment hardware, as well as
a visual inspection of the tail boom attachment fittings for evidence of cracks and
fractures, and report findings to their respective regulatory authority.
Our investigation has not yet determined why the upper-left tail boom
attachment hardware separated on the accident helicopter. Because the tail boom
separated only 114.2 hours after its last torque check and visual inspection, the NTSB
is also concerned that instances of improperly installed or fractured attachment
hardware or fittings may not be detected within the existing 300-hour recurrent
torque check and visual inspection interval and that an in-flight separation of the tail
boom could occur on other Bell 407 helicopters.
The separation of the upper-left attachment bolt may not result in an
immediate separation of the tail boom but represents an impending catastrophic
failure. For the accident helicopter, a shorter torque check and visual inspection
interval of the tail boom attachment hardware and fittings, respectively, would have
increased the number of opportunities to detect that the upper-left attachment
hardware had separated or fractured and the resultant fatigue cracking of the lower-
left attachment fitting on the accident helicopter before an inflight separation of the
tail boom could occur. The NTSB believes that a shorter torque check and visual
inspection interval for all Bell 407 helicopters would increase the likelihood of
detecting fractured attachment hardware before a catastrophic failure can occur, and
any reported findings from these torque checks and visual inspections can help in
understanding when and why the tail boom attachment hardware may separate.
Until the causal factors that led to the separation of the upper-left attachment
hardware can be determined and measures are enacted to ensure the continued
integrity of the attachment hardware, the NTSB concludes that, as an interim action, a
considerably more conservative torque check and visual inspection interval that is
5

Aviation Investigation Report
NTSB/AIR-22-10
less than 300 hours is warranted to identify any improperly installed or fractured tail
boom attachment hardware or fittings to avoid potential separation of the tail boom.
Therefore, the NTSB recommends that the FAA and Transport Canada require
operators of Bell 407 helicopters to conduct subsequent torque checks of the tail
boom attachment hardware and visual inspection of the tail boom attachment fittings
as referenced in Safety Recommendations A-22-28 and -30 at an interval significantly
less than the currently required interval to provide multiple opportunities for
detecting any improperly installed or fractured attachment hardware or fittings.
Require operators to report findings to their respective regulatory authority.
The NTSB notes that determining a more conservative interval for the torque
check and visual inspection can be challenging given the limited information
available. The time since the last torque check of the accident helicopter
(114.2 hours), as well as additional information from the initial torque check and
inspection as recommended, could help the regulatory authorities establish an
intermediate torque check and visual inspection interval that will provide multiple
opportunities to detect potential failures. The data that are collected during the
subsequent torque checks of the tail boom attachment hardware and visual
inspections of the tail boom attachment fittings can then help regulatory authorities
determine factors that could lead to the separation of tail boom attachment hardware
and establish the appropriate torque check and visual inspection interval to detect
potential fractured tail boom attachment hardware in the future.
The NTSB notes that the need for these actions is based on preliminary
findings during our ongoing investigation. Additional actions may be recommended
as the investigation proceeds.
Findings
Any tail boom attachment hardware or fittings that is not installed properly
or is fractured is a safety hazard because it can result in an inflight
separation of the tail boom, which is catastrophic.
A considerably more conservative torque check and visual inspection
interval that is less than 300 hours is warranted to identify any improperly
installed or fractured tail boom attachment hardware or fittings to avoid
potential separation of the tail boom.
Recommendations
To the Federal Aviation Administration:
Require operators of Bell 407 helicopters to conduct an immediate
torque check of the tail boom attachment hardware, as well as a visual
inspection of the tail boom attachment fittings for evidence of cracks
and fractures, and report findings to the FAA. (A-22-28) (Urgent)
6

Aviation Investigation Report
NTSB/AIR-22-10
Require operators of Bell 407 helicopters to conduct subsequent torque
checks of the tail boom attachment hardware and visual inspection of
the tail boom attachment fittings as referenced in Safety
Recommendation A-22-28 at an interval significantly less than the
currently required interval to provide multiple opportunities for
detecting any improperly installed or fractured attachment hardware or
fittings. Require operators to report findings to the FAA. (A-22-29)
(Urgent)
To Transport Canada:
Require operators of Bell 407 helicopters to conduct an immediate
torque check of the tail boom attachment hardware, as well as a visual
inspection of the tail boom attachment fittings for evidence of cracks
and fractures, and report findings to Transport Canada. (A-22-30)
(Urgent)
Require operators of Bell 407 helicopters to conduct subsequent torque
checks of the tail boom attachment hardware and visual inspection of
the tail boom attachment fittings as referenced in Safety
Recommendation A-22-30 at an interval significantly less than the
currently required interval to provide multiple opportunities for
detecting any improperly installed or fractured attachment hardware or
fittings. Require operators to report findings to their respective
regulatory authority. (A-22-31) (Urgent)
BY THE NATIONAL TRANSPORTATION SAFETY BOARD
JENNIFER HOMENDY MICHAEL GRAHAM
Chair Member
BRUCE LANDSBERG THOMAS CHAPMAN
Vice Chairman Member
Report Date: December 1, 2022
7

Aviation Investigation Report
NTSB/AIR-22-10
The National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB) is an independent federal agency dedicated
to promoting aviation, railroad, highway, marine, and pipeline safety. Established in 1967, the agency is
mandated by Congress through the Independent Safety Board Act of 1974, to investigate
transportation accidents, determine the probable causes of the accidents, issue safety
recommendations, study transportation safety issues, and evaluate the safety effectiveness of
government agencies involved in transportation. The NTSB makes public its actions and decisions
through accident reports, safety studies, special investigation reports, safety recommendations, and
statistical reviews.
The NTSB does not assign fault or blame for an accident or incident; rather, as specified by
NTSB regulation, “accident/incident investigations are fact-finding proceedings with no formal issues
and no adverse parties … and are not conducted for the purpose of determining the rights or liabilities
of any person” (Title 49 Code of Federal Regulations section 831.4). Assignment of fault or legal liability
is not relevant to the NTSB’s statutory mission to improve transportation safety by investigating
accidents and incidents and issuing safety recommendations. In addition, statutory language prohibits
the admission into evidence or use of any part of an NTSB report related to an accident in a civil action
for damages resulting from a matter mentioned in the report (Title 49 United States Code section
1154(b)).
Recent publications are available in their entirety on the NTSB website. Other information about
available publications also may be obtained from the website or by contacting—
National Transportation Safety Board
Records Management Division, CIO-40
490 L’Enfant Plaza, SW
Washington, DC 20594
(800) 877-6799 or (202) 314-6551
8