Aviation Investigation Report
NTSB-AIR-22-06
May 4, 2022 AIR-22-06
Require Safeguards to Prevent Cessna 560XL
Takeoff with Parking Brake Engaged
Introduction
The National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB) is providing the following
information to urge the Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) to take action on the
safety recommendations in this report. We identified transportation safety issues
during one ongoing investigation and one previous investigation involving Cessna
560XL airplanes in which parking brake pressure was not fully released before
attempted takeoffs, which prevented the airplanes from rotating for takeoff. Once the
airplanes reached this point in the takeoff sequence, they were beyond the point at
which they could be stopped safely, leading to fatal or serious injuries. The NTSB is
issuing three safety recommendations to the FAA.
Background and Analysis
On September 2, 2021, a Cessna 560XL airplane, N560AR, overran the
departure end of the runway during the takeoff roll near Farmington, Connecticut.
The preliminary report for this investigation included a witness’s statement that when
the airplane departed the runway, it was in a level attitude but that after clearing the
departure end of the runway and becoming briefly airborne, it pitched up then
impacted a pole. After that, the airplane impacted the ground then a building and
was destroyed, and the two pilots and two passengers were fatally injured. One
occupant of the building that was impacted sustained serious injury and three
occupants sustained minor injuries.
A preliminary review of parameters from the airplane’s flight data recorder
revealed that the airplane had exceeded the speed required to take off (rotational
speed or V) and did not lift off the ground in response to the pilot pulling the yoke
r
aft. However, the airplane rapidly pitched up once the terrain dropped away beyond
the departure end of the runway. An on-site examination revealed that the airplane’s
parking brake valve and pull knob were in the set position, which indicated that the
1

Aviation Investigation Report
NTSB-AIR-22-06
airplane’s parking brake had likely not been fully released before the attempted
takeoff.1
A similar accident occurred on August 21, 2019, near Oroville, California. The
pilots reported that after the Cessna 560XL airplane, N91GY, reached V during the
r
takeoff roll, the airplane did not respond to the pilot flying pulling the yoke aft for
takeoff. The pilot flying stated that he applied full thrust reversers and maximum
braking to reject the takeoff, but the airplane overran the departure end of the
runway. The pilots and passengers were not injured, and the airplane was destroyed
by a postimpact fire. Postaccident examination of the parking brake valve, which was
closed, and interviews with the pilot flying, who was seated in the left seat, indicated
that he had not released the airplane’s parking brake pull knob, which was located
next to his left knee, before the takeoff roll.
According to the pilot flying, he believed that the airplane “shouldn’t move” if
the parking brake was set and takeoff power was applied.2 The NTSB determined the
probable cause of this accident to be “the pilot’s failure to release the parking brake
before attempting to initiate the takeoff, which produced an unexpected retarding
force and airplane nose down pitching moment. Also causal was the flight crew’s
delayed decision to abort the takeoff, which resulted in a runway excursion.
Contributing to the accident was the lack of a ‘no takeoff’ annunciation warning that
the parking brake was engaged, and lack of a checklist item to ensure the parking
brake was fully released immediately before takeoff.”
Similarly, the Australian Transport Safety Bureau’s (ATSB’s) investigation of a
September 2015 accident near Lismore, New South Wales, Australia, determined that
the pilots in a Cessna 550 had set the parking brake during a lengthy hold waiting to
depart and did not release it before attempting to takeoff, which led to a rejected
takeoff and runway overrun.3 The ATSB’s investigation found that Cessna Citation
airplanes, which include both the Cessna 550 and 560XL, did not have a cockpit
annunciation to alert the pilots that the parking brake was set or an unambiguous
checklist item to direct pilots to fully release the parking brake before takeoff is
initiated.4 The ATSB made a recommendation to Textron Aviation (Textron), the
1 Visit ntsb.gov to find additional preliminary information for this NTSB investigation (case number
ERA21FA346). Use the CAROL Query to search safety recommendations and investigations.
2 Visit ntsb.gov to find additional information in the public docket for this NTSB investigation (case
number WPR19FA230).
3 The accident airplane had the parking brake pull knob in the same location as the 560XL and did
not have a visual indicator for a parking brake that is not fully released.
4 The airplane’s “before start” checklist directs the left-seat pilot to set the parking brake before
starting the engine; its taxi checklist directs the pilot flying to check the brakes before taxiing but does
not specify which brakes. The airplane’s static and rolling takeoff checklists direct the pilot to “release
brakes,” but that item could be misinterpreted to refer only to the toe brakes.
2

Aviation Investigation Report
NTSB-AIR-22-06
airplane manufacturer, to address these findings.5 In an October 2017 response,
Textron stated that the recommended actions were not needed because it was
“simple airmanship” to remember to release the parking brake before the takeoff run;
Textron neither updated its pretakeoff checklists nor added a parking brake
annunciation.
The Accident Investigation Bureau, Nigeria is currently investigating an
October 2018 incident near Bauchi, Nigeria, where the pilot of a Cessna 560XL
rejected the takeoff after the airplane reached V but did not become airborne.6
r
Only the left-seat pilot of a Cessna 560XL may set the parking brake at various
points before takeoff, such as when holding short of the runway, before receiving
clearance to take off, or before initiating takeoff. For example, the pilot flying (who
was in the left seat of the Oroville accident airplane) recalled that he likely set the
parking brake while holding short of the runway as he finished the items in the taxi
checklist.7 To set the parking brake in a Cessna 560XL airplane, the left-seat pilot
depresses the toe brakes while pulling the parking brake pull knob, which is shown in
the figure below. The amount of wheel brake pressure applied depends on how fully
the toe brakes are depressed when the parking brake pull knob is pulled. To release
the parking brake pressure, the left-seat pilot pushes the parking brake pull knob
forward. Given the Cessna 560XL parking brake pull knob’s location on the lower left
side of the left-seat pilot near that pilot’s knee, the pull knob is not visible to the
right-seat pilot.
5 For more information, see ATSB. 2016. Runway excursion involving Cessna 550, VH-FGK, Lismore
Airport, New South Wales, 25 December 2015. AO-2015-114.
6 Accident Investigation Bureau, Nigeria. 2021. Interim statement on the serious incident involving
Cessna Citation 560 XLS+ aircraft with nationality and registration marks 5N-HAR operated by the
Nigeria Police which occurred at Sir Abubakar Tafawa Balewa Airport Bauchi, Bauchi State; Nigeria on
3rd October, 2018. NPF/2018/10/03/INTR/03.
7 The pilot reported that he engaged the parking brake to check the airplane’s rudder bias, which
is the last item on the airplane’s taxi checklist.
3

Aviation Investigation Report
NTSB-AIR-22-06
Figure 1. The location of the parking brake pull knob in a Cessna 560XL exemplar airplane
(XLS model). (Source: Delta Private Jets)
Based on the results of an airplane performance study completed during the
Oroville investigation, if a Cessna 560XL airplane is accelerating with partial parking
brake pressure applied, the resulting retarding force at the wheel-runway interface
creates a pitching moment that opposes airplane nose-up rotation. When the
airplane reaches V, the pitching moment opposing the airplane nose-up rotation
r
may overpower the elevator’s ability to rotate the airplane nose up and prevent the
airplane from taking off. If the takeoff is rejected after reaching V, the airplane may
r
not be able to stop safely on the remaining runway and may impact hazards beyond
the runway.8 The identified accidents demonstrate that, contrary to the Oroville pilot’s
expectation, a Cessna 560XL airplane with both engines at takeoff power and at least
partial parking brake pressure applied can accelerate and reach or exceed V, not be
r
able to lift off, and be unable to stop on the remaining runway.
To meet the requirements of Title 14 Code of Federal Regulations (CFR)
Section 25.735, Brakes and Braking Systems, a parking brake must prevent the
airplane from rolling on a paved, level runway when set by the pilot and with takeoff
8 Potential hazards beyond the runway include steep slopes, fences, hills, buildings, bodies of
water, and highways.
4

Aviation Investigation Report
NTSB-AIR-22-06
power on the critical engine.9 The parking brake for the Cessna 560XL, which was first
certified in 1998, met the requirements of the 1965 standard by demonstrating that
the parking brake prevented the airplane from rolling when it was set with full parking
brake pressure applied and one engine at takeoff power.
Effective May 2002, the FAA amended 14 CFR 25.735 (Amendment 25-107) to
state, in part, “There must be indication in the cockpit when the parking brake is not
fully released.”10 However, because the Cessna 560XL was initially certificated 4 years
before the parking brake indication amendment, there is no requirement for a
cockpit indication if the parking brake is not fully released. The FAA also approved
two subsequent derivative models (or “changed aeronautical products”) of the
Cessna 560XL, the XLS, and XLS+; because Textron did not change the function of
the parking brake in those models, it only had to meet the 1965 standard.11
A visual indication in the pilots’ expected scan range would attract attention
and increase the likelihood that pilots will notice and address an unsafe condition, in
this case by fully releasing the parking brake before takeoff.12 The effectiveness of a
visual indication (for the horizontal stabilizer trim setting) was demonstrated shortly
before the pilots involved in the Oroville accident began the takeoff. They received a
“no takeoff” indication on the cockpit indicator panel alerting them of an unsafe
horizontal stabilizer trim setting, which they successfully identified and addressed.
The NTSB notes that, because other countries require that pilots be alerted
when the parking brake is not fully released before takeoff, Textron wired the
airplane’s “no takeoff” annunciator to include a parking brake indication for initial
9 The parking brake standard in 14 CFR 25.735 was first issued in 1965, and this was the standard
until May 2002, which will be discussed later.
10 Title 14 CFR 25.735 Amendment 25-107 was effective May 24, 2002, and incorporated the
parking brake indication and other changes to federal requirements for airplane braking systems
based on the recommendations of the Aviation Rulemaking Advisory Committee, which was directed
to harmonize European, Canadian, and US braking standards.
11 (a) According to 14 CFR 21.101, the FAA approves changes for derivative models if it finds that
the changes are not significant enough to warrant application for a new type certificate. The regulation
also outlines four exceptions to this requirement: (1) if the change was not significant, (2) for those
areas or components not affected by the change, (3) if such compliance would not contribute
materially to the level of safety, and (4) if such compliance would be impractical. This process enables a
manufacturer to introduce design updates without resubmitting the entire airplane design for
certification review. (b) The Oroville accident airplane was manufactured in 2003 in accordance with
the initial certification standard, the Farmington accident airplane was manufactured in 2009 as an
XLS+ derivative model, and the Bauchi accident airplane was manufactured in 2011 as an XLS+
derivative model.
12 Berman, B.A., Kochan, J.A., Burian, B.K., Pruchnicki, S., Christopher, B., and Silverman, E. 2017.
Alerts and Cues on the Flight Deck: Analysis and Applications. National Aeronautics and Space
Administration (NASA) report NASA/TM-2017-219720. Moffett Field, CA: NASA Ames Research
Center.
5

Aviation Investigation Report
NTSB-AIR-22-06
certification models and XLS derivatives manufactured for export to Ireland and the
UK since 2002 and 2007, respectively.13 Beginning in 2002, Textron offered buyers
the option for the existing “no takeoff” annunciation to include a visual and aural
annunciation if the parking brake was not fully released on some newly manufactured
models of the Cessna 560XL, including those in the United States. No Cessna 560XLs
delivered in the United States have been produced with this feature to date.14 Textron
continues to manufacture Cessna 560XL airplanes without a parking brake indication,
including the XLS+ derivative model, and the option is no longer available on newly
manufactured Cessna 560XL airplanes.
As the FAA’s updated parking brake standard in 14 CFR 25.735 suggests and
the Oroville accident pilots’ actions to address the “no takeoff” visual indication show,
an indication to alert pilots to fully release the parking brake before starting the
takeoff roll is an important safeguard. However, Cessna 560XL airplanes continue to
operate in the United States without a parking brake indication, and Textron
continues to manufacture and deliver airplanes in the United States without such an
alert. The NTSB concludes that, without a parking brake indication, some Cessna
560XL pilots may not recognize that the parking brake is not fully released and
attempt to take off, which could result in a runway overrun. Thus, the NTSB
recommends that the FAA issue an airworthiness directive for in-service Cessna
560XL airplanes to require that they meet the parking brake indication requirements
of Amendment 25-107 of 14 CFR 25.735. The NTSB also recommends that the FAA
revise the type certification basis for Cessna 560XL airplanes and future derivative
models to require that newly manufactured airplanes meet the parking brake
indication requirements of Amendment 25-107 of 14 CFR 25.735.
Unambiguous and mandatory checklist items that are correctly sequenced
serve as important redundancies to a visual indication. The existence of a physical
stimulus in the cockpit, such as a pull knob or indication, does not guarantee that the
13 The Cessna 560XL has a “no takeoff” visual and aural annunciation for other items that would
impede a safe takeoff, such as an unsafe horizontal stabilator trim setting. The Irish Aviation Authority
requires the annunciator to be wired for the parking brake for Cessna 560XL airplanes; at least eight
Cessna 560XL airplanes have been built to the United Kingdom standard, which includes a “no takeoff”
annunciation for a parking brake that is not fully released. The Cessna 560XL airplane flight manual
supplement 39 (approved by the FAA in 2002) and supplement 57 (approved by the FAA in 2007)
state that the Irish and United Kingdom standards, respectively, for the “no takeoff” annunciator
include a parking brake that is not fully released.
14 All Cessna 560XL airplanes have a “no takeoff” annunciation for other items that would impede a
safe takeoff, such as an unsafe horizontal stabilator trim setting. According to Textron, for some initial
certification and XLS derivative models, it offered the option to install a “no takeoff” annunciation to
include a parking brake that is not fully released; it did not offer that option for the XLS+ derivative
model. Both the Oroville and Farmington accident airplanes had “no takeoff” annunciation systems
installed, but neither airplane had been built with the parking brake option.
6

Aviation Investigation Report
NTSB-AIR-22-06
pilot will perceive an unsafe condition, as noted in the ATSB investigation.15 Thus, the
NTSB concludes that a checklist item before takeoff is initiated would aid pilots of
Cessna 560XL airplanes in ensuring the full release of the parking brake before the
takeoff roll and prevent hazardous runway overruns. Therefore, the NTSB
recommends that the FAA require Textron to include a checklist item on the Cessna
560XL pretakeoff checklist for pilots to verify that the airplane’s parking brake is fully
released before takeoff is initiated.
