DRAFT—Do Not Distribute Aviation Investigation Report
Report Number
August 20, 2024 Aviation Investigation Report: AIR-24-05
Define the Meaning and Operational Use of
Instantaneous Wind Reports
Introduction
The National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB) is providing the following
information to urge the Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) to take action on the
safety recommendation in this report. This recommendation is derived from findings
from our investigation of a February 2022 airplane accident in which the flight crew
attempted to take off in gusting tailwind conditions based on an unsolicited
instantaneous wind report provided by air traffic control (ATC); the pilot aborted the
takeoff when the airplane would not rotate and it overran the end of the runway. The
NTSB is issuing one new safety recommendation to the FAA.
Background and Analysis
On February 21, 2022, a Raytheon Aircraft Company Hawker 800XP airplane,
N99AP, overran the end of runway 33 after the flight crew aborted the takeoff in gusting
tailwind conditions at Aspen-Pitkin County Airport (ASE) in Aspen, Colorado.1 The flight
crew of the Title 14 Code of Federal Regulations (CFR) Part 91 business flight initiated the
takeoff based on an unsolicited instantaneous wind report from the ASE ATC tower
controller. The instantaneous wind report indicated a wind direction of 180° at 10 knots
(kts), which was the airplane’s maximum tailwind component for takeoff.2 However, the
instantaneous wind measurement was recorded by the airport’s standalone weather
sensor (SAWS) during an apparent lull in the gusting wind conditions and was not
representative of other wind reports the flight crew received during the 30-minute
period before takeoff. These reports indicated wind speeds as high as 18 kts gusting to
30 kts.3 Just before providing the instantaneous wind report, the tower controller
1 Visit ntsb.gov to find additional information in the public docket for this NTSB investigation
(case number CEN22LA130). Use the CAROL Query to search safety recommendations and investigations.
2 The captain later reported that “at takeoff clearance, constant winds were reported by tower at
[180° at 10 kts] which was within aircraft maximum tailwind takeoff limitation.”
3 Runway 15/33 is ASE’s only runway. Due to mountainous terrain, takeoffs are not permitted from
runway 15.
1

Aviation Investigation Report
AIR -24-05
provided a 2-minute average SAWS wind report to the flight crew that indicated wind
speeds at 16 kts gusting to 25 kts.4
According to the captain, at the rotation speed (V ) of 121 kts, he applied back
R
pressure on the yoke; however, the airplane would not become airborne. After a few
seconds without any indication the airplane would take off, the captain called for and
performed an aborted takeoff by reducing the engines to idle, deploying the thrust
reversers, and applying the brakes. The airplane departed the end of the runway and
sustained substantial damage; none of the airplane’s six occupants was injured.
Postaccident examination of the airplane and flight control system found no
anomalies, and findings from an airplane performance study conducted during the
investigation indicated that the airplane should have been able to rotate once it reached
the reported V . Therefore, it is very likely that the airspeed did not reach V due to
R R
tailwind conditions that exceeded the airplane’s maximum tailwind limitation.5 The NTSB
determined the probable cause of the accident was the flight crew’s decision to take off
in tailwind conditions that were consistently above the airplane’s tailwind limitation,
which resulted in a runway overrun following an aborted takeoff. Contributing was the
flight crew’s use of the instantaneous wind report for the decision to attempt the takeoff.
Operational decision-making at ASE can be challenging because the airport has
only runway 33 available for departures. When potentially hazardous wind conditions are
present, it is up to pilots to determine whether wind conditions are within limitations of
their aircraft, and they rely on wind reports from ATC to make this determination.
Following the February 2022 accident, a Part 135 charter company that operates at ASE
created and disseminated an informational document about instantaneous wind reports
describing how instantaneous wind is measured and the potential hazards of relying on
these reports to meet aircraft limitations or performance. The document directs the
operator’s pilots not to use an instantaneous wind speed “to meet tailwind limitations
and/or performance.”
Following a fatal 2014 accident at ASE in which the wind report provided to the
flight crew was near or exceeded the airplane’s performance capabilities, the ASE tower
updated its SOPs to require controllers to provide the 2-minute average SAWS wind
measurement (see the ASE ATC tower controller wind display in the figure below),
4 Other wind reports provided to the flight crew were recorded by the airport’s automated surface
observing system. In addition to the SAWS and automated surface observing system, ASE has five
windsocks located around the airfield.
5 The airplane was not equipped with a flight data recorder or any additional data sources that
could have captured or reported the airplane’s airspeed during the attempted takeoff.
2

Aviation Investigation Report
AIR -24-05
including any wind gust information, to “all aircraft in lieu of any other wind information.”6
The SOPs also stated that this information, which it defined as “the official wind,” could
be supplemented with the SAWS instantaneous wind measurement if a pilot requests it
or “in the judgment of the controller.”7 According to the ASE air traffic manager, many
business pilots are familiar with and follow the procedure for requesting instantaneous
wind reports. He noted, however, that other pilots who do not frequently fly at ASE may
be unfamiliar with the procedure.
Figure. SAWS 2-minute average wind and instantaneous wind displays in the ASE ATC
tower.
As part of the February 2022 accident investigation, the FAA stated that it would
not be feasible to determine how many of the 526 airports in the National Airspace
System (NAS) are equipped to measure instantaneous wind or have SOPs that address
how such measurements should be used. It is therefore unknown how many airports in
the NAS measure instantaneous wind or provide instantaneous wind reports to pilots.
Further, as noted in the NTSB’s final report concerning the February 2022 accident at
ASE, although the term “instantaneous wind” is used by the airport’s ATC personnel, it is
not defined in any FAA publication. Lacking such definition or guidance, the accident
flight crew interpreted the instantaneous wind provided by ATC just before takeoff as
the constant wind conditions.
6 (a) The NTSB determined the probable cause of the accident was the flight crew's failure to
maintain airplane control during landing following an unstabilized approach. Contributing to the accident
were the flight crew's decision to land with a tailwind above the airplane's operating limitations and their
failure not to conduct a go-around when the approach became unstabilized. For more information about
this investigation, see case number CEN14FA099 at the NTSB’s website. (b) According to the ASE air traffic
manager, the wind gust information provided represents the highest gusts recorded by SAWS in the last
10 minutes.
7 Before this update to the ASE tower’s SOPs, providing the official wind report was at the
controllers’ discretion.
3

Aviation Investigation Report
AIR -24-05
The NTSB concludes that an official definition of instantaneous wind and
guidance on its use during flight operations would facilitate pilots’ decision-making
when operating in potentially hazardous wind conditions. Therefore, the NTSB
recommends that the FAA define the term “instantaneous wind” and develop guidance
for pilots on proper use of an instantaneous wind report in operational decision-making.
