Aviation Investigation Report
NTSB/AIR-22-01
AIR-22-01
December 20, 2021
Require Carbon Monoxide Detectors in
Certain General Aviation Aircraft
Introduction
The National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB) is providing the following
information to urge the Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) to take action on this
safety recommendation. It is derived from previous investigations and reports of
aircraft accidents in which undetected carbon monoxide (CO) poisoning led to pilot
impairment and subsequent fatal or serious injuries due to crashes.1 In each of these
accidents, the pilot was not alerted to CO entering the cabin in enough time to
counteract the effects of CO poisoning. The NTSB is issuing one safety
recommendation to the FAA and one recommendation to pilot industry groups.
Background and Analysis
In many airplanes with reciprocating engines, a defect, leak, or failure in the
aircraft’s exhaust pipes, muffler, or heat transfer system can introduce CO into the
enclosed cabin that can go unnoticed by pilots or passengers.2 For example, on
January 6, 2020, about 1415 eastern standard time, a Cessna 172H, N1612F, was
destroyed when it impacted terrain near Newborn, Georgia, and the pilot died.3
Toxicology testing of the pilot’s blood indicated an impairing level of CO.
Examination of the two muffler assemblies revealed holes and wall thickness loss
around the right muffler body, which likely introduced CO into the cabin. The NTSB
1 The appendix at the end of this report contains a list of investigations that support these
recommendations. Visit ntsb.gov to find additional information in the public docket for each NTSB
accident investigation. Use the CAROL Query to search safety recommendations and investigations.
2 CO is a colorless, odorless, and tasteless gas that is a byproduct of the incomplete combustion of
carbon-containing materials, including the fuel used to power aircraft engines and heating systems.
3 For more information about this accident, see case number ERA20FA068 at the NTSB’s website.
1

Aviation Investigation Report
NTSB/AIR-22-01
determined the probable cause of the accident was pilot incapacitation due to CO
poisoning but was unable to determine whether the airplane had a CO detector due
to the postaccident fire damage.
Symptoms of CO inhalation include headaches, drowsiness, nausea, or
shortness of breath. If a pilot does not quickly recognize these early symptoms, which
are often not specific enough to be recognized as CO poisoning, continued exposure
can lead to impaired judgment and decreased ability to control the aircraft. Longer
exposure or higher blood concentration levels can be incapacitating and can lead to
unconsciousness, coma, and death. For instance, toxicology testing following a
November 9, 2018, accident involving a Piper PA28-236, N91770, indicated that all
four occupants had inhaled enough CO to result in confusion, seizures, or loss of
consciousness.4 The airplane, which was not equipped with a CO detector, was
destroyed when it collided with terrain near Guthrie Center, Iowa, and the pilot and
three passengers were fatally injured. The NTSB determined the probable cause of
the accident was pilot incapacitation due to CO poisoning.
A review of NTSB reports between 1982 and 2020 identified 31 accidents
attributed to CO poisoning (see the appendix for a list of these accidents). The data
show that 77% of those accidents were fatal and led to 42 fatalities and 4 serious
injuries. CO detectors were not found or reported in 30 of those accident reports.
Although these accidents can be more prevalent in colder months when pilots are
more likely to use aircraft heating systems, accidents related to CO poisoning happen
throughout the year; of the 31 accidents between 1982 and 2020, 6 occurred
between June and August. The FAA’s service difficulty report (SDR) database also
showed at least 45 incidents involving a defect, leak, or failure in engine exhaust
systems between 1993 and 2020.5
Despite the widely recognized dangers of CO poisoning during flight, the FAA
does not require CO detectors on enclosed-cabin general aviation aircraft with
4 For more information about this accident, see case number WPR19FA022 at the NTSB’s website.
5 SDRs are reports submitted by aircraft certificate holders and certificated repair stations that
provide the FAA with airworthiness statistical data to identity frequently occurring safety issues that it
can address. Although the 45 SDRs did not specifically mention CO poisoning, the defects identified in
the reports could have resulted in CO entering the cabin. Additionally, in aircraft that do not have
defective exhaust systems, exhaust gases expelled from the engine can potentially enter the cabin
through damaged or defective firewall seals, door seals, landing gear compartments, or steering
boots. For example, data from the SDR database show at least three incidents between 1998 and 2006
where such failures allowed CO to enter the cabin. Additionally, because Title 14 Code of Federal
Regulations Part 91 operators are not required to submit SDRs after each incident, the number of
incidents is likely higher.
2

Aviation Investigation Report
NTSB/AIR-22-01
reciprocating engines. The NTSB previously addressed the need for CO detectors on
aircraft after a 2004 review of accidents found CO poisoning from exhaust system
failure to be an important issue for general aviation aircraft. As a result, the NTSB
issued four safety recommendations to the FAA (A-04-25 through -28) to address the
dangers of CO poisoning in general aviation aircraft cabins. Safety Recommendation
A-04-28 specifically asked the FAA to require the installation of CO detectors that
quickly and distinctly alert pilots to the presence of CO in all single-engine,
reciprocating powered airplanes with forward-mounted engines and enclosed
cockpits that are already equipped with any airplane system needed for the
operation of such a CO detector.
The FAA’s response to Safety Recommendation A-04-28 stated that it would
not require the use of CO detection devices because CO poisoning is due to the
failure of an exhaust system, and, therefore, the lack of a CO detector on its own does
not constitute an unsafe condition. The FAA’s response also pointed to its actions in
response to Safety Recommendations A-04-25 through -27, which included:6
• Conducting research into CO poisoning detection technology.
• Reviewing international standards for detectors.
• Updating Technical Standard Order (TSO) C48, “Carbon Monoxide
Detector Instruments,” to include the most recent version of the Society of
Automotive Engineers Aerospace Standard 412 Revision B (AS412B),
“Carbon Monoxide Detector Instruments” as minimum standards for CO
detector applications.7
6 Safety Recommendation A-04-25 asked the FAA to evaluate inspection methods for exhaust
systems and establish a replacement interval. In response, the FAA enhanced previously
recommended exhaust system inspection standards, such as pressure testing rather than visual
inspections, and recommended replacing mufflers at 1,000 service hours. However, the FAA did not
require those inspection standards or the replacement frequency; the NTSB found the FAA’s actions
only partially responsive and classified this recommendation “Closed—Unacceptable Action” on July 5,
2011. Safety Recommendation A-04-26 asked the FAA to evaluate CO detector technology for use in
general aviation airplanes, and Safety Recommendation A-04-27 asked the FAA to develop specific
standards to ensure any detection device used in general aviation aircraft quickly and distinctly alerts
the user to the presence of CO in the cockpit before the CO reaches a level that would impair a pilot’s
ability to safely operate an aircraft. As a result of the FAA’s action, the NTSB classified Safety
Recommendations A-04-26 and -27 “Closed—Acceptable Action” on July 5, 2011.
7 TSO C48 was updated on May 6, 2009, to C48A and outlines the process by which a
manufacturer applies for a TSO authorization or letter of design approval for a CO detector and
requires the minimum standards of AS412B for TSO authorization.
3

Aviation Investigation Report
NTSB/AIR-22-01
• Publishing Special Airworthiness Information Bulletin CE-10-19 R1, “Engine
Exhaust and Carbon Monoxide Detectors.”
The special airworthiness information bulletin advised all owners and
operators of the recommended use of a CO detector and identified recommended
actions to detect CO leaks during 100-hour and annual inspections. Because the FAA
did not require CO detectors in affected airplanes as recommended, the NTSB
classified Safety Recommendation A-04-28 “Closed—Unacceptable Action” on July 5,
2011.
In a 2009 report on CO detectors (produced as part of the FAA’s research in
response to Safety Recommendation A-04-26), the FAA stated that its recommended
(not required) exhaust system inspection standards and muffler replacement time
frames would prevent many instances of CO poisoning.8 However, subsequent
accidents show that the FAA’s recommended inspection and muffler replacement
guidelines are inadequate to protect pilots against the hazards of CO poisoning. As
shown in the appendix, 9 accidents (which led to 11 fatalities) that identified CO
poisoning have been investigated by the NTSB since the FAA’s 2010
recommendations for enhanced exhaust system inspection standards and replacing
mufflers at 1,000 service hours. However, because toxicology testing for CO
poisoning is generally only performed as part of the investigation of fatal accidents
when a suitable specimen is available, the number of accidents due to CO poisoning
may be higher.
In accidents since the FAA’s recommendations in 2010, the NTSB found that
maintenance personnel have likely missed exhaust system failures during inspections
and that mufflers have failed in substantially fewer than 1,000 service hours. For
example, the investigation of a fatal November 4, 2019, accident found that one of
the airplane’s two mufflers, which was replaced 742.9 flight hours before the accident
flight, had corroded and that the muffler’s walls were thin and had pin holes.9 At the
airplane’s last annual inspection, less than 15 flight hours before the accident, the
exhaust system had not been pressure checked (to identify holes in the muffler) as
recommended in the FAA’s enhanced inspection standards, but such an inspection
was not required.
8 FAA. 2009. Detection and prevention of carbon monoxide exposure in General Aviation Aircraft,
Document No. DOT/FAA/AR-09/49. Accessed online February 25, 2021.
9 For more information about this accident, see case number ERA20FA031 at the NTSB’s website.
4

Aviation Investigation Report
NTSB/AIR-22-01
In addition, as we noted in support of our 2004 recommendations, pressure
testing will not effectively identify a hazardous condition that would lead to CO
poisoning until after the cracks and leaks have already perforated the muffler.
Although the FAA ultimately recommended the 1,000-hour time frame for replacing
mufflers in response to Safety Recommendation A-04-25, the FAA acknowledged the
limitations of a single replacement time frame in preventing exhaust system failures
due to the design variations of exhaust systems among aircraft manufacturers.10
As stated previously, in response to Safety Recommendation A-04-27, the FAA
updated TSO C48 to include AS412B. This standard includes some of the most
important detector characteristics identified by the FAA in its 2009 research report,
such as both aural and visual alarms, and an alarm at specific CO concentrations. The
standard also describes specific tests to ensure the detectors’ performance under
various conditions encountered while flying, including high altitudes, temperature
ranges, and other air contaminants. However, the FAA only recommends rather than
requires compliance with TSO C48A for CO detectors used in aircraft.
A lack of required minimum standards for CO detectors can result in ineffective
alerting if detectors do not meet those standards. For example, out of the 31
accidents attributed to CO poisoning, one involved an airplane that was equipped
with a CO detector. However, toxicology testing following the accident indicated that
the pilot had inhaled enough CO to have likely resulted in confusion, impaired
judgment, and difficulty concentrating.11 The airplane’s CO detector was a type
known as a “spot” detector, a passive CO alerting device that turns dark in the
presence of CO; it does not include an active aural or visual alert and would therefore
not be compliant with TSO C48A. Further, the airplane’s CO detector instructions
stated to replace it every 90 days, but its opening date was recorded as more than a
year before the accident.
Even when functional and used correctly, the effectiveness of spot detectors in
a cockpit is limited. These passive detectors require pilots to visually recognize the
change in detector color, which can only be accomplished as part of an intentional
visual scan—a task that may not be effective during night conditions or possible while
impaired by CO poisoning. In addition, spot detectors can be contaminated by
10 In addition to the 9 accidents involving CO poisoning investigated by the NTSB since 2010,
when the FAA recommended a 1,000-hour replacement time frame, SDR data between 2010 and
2020 also show 13 exhaust system failures that allowed or had the potential to allow CO entry into the
cabin and involved components that had less than 1,000 service hours, 8 of those with less than 200
service hours.
11 For more information about this accident, see case number ANC15FA032 at the NTSB’s website.
5

Aviation Investigation Report
NTSB/AIR-22-01
aromatic cleaners, solvents, and other chemicals that are routinely used in aircraft
maintenance. The NTSB recognizes that spot detectors can appeal to aircraft owners
because they are less expensive than TSO-compliant CO detectors with aural alerts,
which must be installed and hardwired to the aircraft. Although the detectors that had
the most crucial features identified by the FAA in its 2009 report typically cost
thousands of dollars at that time, we note that the price of alerting CO detectors has
since decreased.
The NTSB emphasizes that, although potentially more cost-effective, CO
detectors that do not meet an aviation-appropriate minimum performance standard
to ensure they operate effectively in an aircraft can give pilots a false sense of
protection from CO poisoning.12 When pilots purchase a CO detector that they
believe is appropriate for aircraft use and will alert them to the presence of CO, they
may rely more on the device rather than being alert to the early symptoms of CO
poisoning. If the device is not built to an aviation-appropriate minimum performance
standard, it may not appropriately alert the pilot in a timely manner to avoid a crash.
If a minimum performance standard is met and active aural or visual alerting is
included, non-TSO-compliant CO detectors could be an effective means of
preventing CO poisoning in flight. For example, through the Non-Required Safety
Enhancing Equipment (NORSEE) program, the FAA has approved CO detectors that
have active aural or visual alerting.13 CO detectors that adhere to the critical
detection, alerting, and altitude requirements of an industry standard such as AS412B
would also be effective in flight.14 Further, some multifunction devices are built with
CO detection capabilities. Again, although non-TSO-compliant CO detectors can be
more affordable compared to the costs of TSO-compliant detectors, the accuracy and
reliability of their alerting capabilities should be the priority. If required, non-TSO-
compliant CO detectors that meet an aviation-appropriate minimum performance
12 Some CO detectors on the market can also be intended for different purposes, such as in
mobile homes or recreational vehicles, and may lack the capabilities required to effectively operate in
an aircraft.
13 NORSEE guidelines were developed in response to recommendations from the General
Aviation Joint Steering Committee, which is a joint effort by the FAA and industry stakeholders to
improve general aviation safety. These guidelines are intended to be “scalable and adjustable to
accommodate and encourage the installation of new technology safety enhancements into all aircraft
product types” and are approved by the FAA.
14 The AS412B standard, which was discussed previously in this report, does not require the CO
detector to be installed in the aircraft.
6

Aviation Investigation Report
NTSB/AIR-22-01
standard would be an effective means of preventing CO poisoning in the cabin.
However, none of these types of CO detectors are required devices.
In the 17 years since the NTSB issued Safety Recommendations A-04-25
through -28, we have continued to alert pilots and mechanics to the dangers of CO
poisoning. In September 2017, the NTSB issued two safety alerts on the dangers of
CO poisoning. Safety Alert 69, “Pilots: Prevent Carbon Monoxide Poisoning,”
suggests, among other things, that pilots install a CO detector and check their
aircraft’s exhaust system during preflight inspections for cracking or evidence of soot.
Safety Alert 70, “Mechanics: Prevent Carbon Monoxide Poisoning,” suggests, among
other things, that mechanics inspect exhaust systems, vents, and other areas that
could introduce CO into the cabin.15
In addition, aviation safety agencies in other countries have highlighted the
need for active-alerting CO detectors in the cockpit to prevent accidents. The United
Kingdom’s Air Accidents Investigation Branch (AAIB) investigation of a fatal January
2019 accident determined that the airplane broke up in flight after the pilot’s loss of
control due to CO poisoning. As a result, the AAIB recommended that the FAA and
other civil aviation authorities require piston engine aircraft that may have a risk of CO
poisoning to have a CO detector with an active warning to alert pilots to the presence
of elevated levels of CO.16
The Australian Transport Safety Bureau’s investigation of a fatal December
2017 accident determined that the pilot’s flying abilities had degraded due to CO
poisoning. The airplane was equipped with a CO spot detector, but the Australian
Transport Safety Bureau found that it was “likely not effective on the accident flight
due to sun bleaching,” and a detector with aural or visual alerts would have more
effectively alerted the pilot to elevated levels of CO in the cabin.17
The presence of CO in an aircraft cabin presents a hazardous condition to
pilots. The FAA’s current recommended exhaust system inspections and muffler
15 Safety Alerts 69 and 70 can be accessed online at the NTSB’s safety alert web page.
16 AAIB. 2020. Report on the accident to Piper PA-46-310P Malibu, N264DB, 22 nm north-north-
west of Guernsey on 21 January 2019. Aircraft Accident Report AAR 1/2020. In July 2020, the FAA
responded that it was “evaluating this recommendation,” and the AAIB classified the response as
“Partially Adequate.” March 2021, the FAA responded that it did “not have justification to support
mandatory requirements for installed CO detectors in all piston aircraft,” but it was exploring options
to encourage CO detector use.
17 Australian Transport Safety Bureau. 2021. Collision with water involving de Havilland Canada
DHC-2, VH-NOO, Jerusalem Bay (Hawkesbury River), New South Wales, on 31 December 2017. AO-
2017-118.
7

Aviation Investigation Report
NTSB/AIR-22-01
replacement schedules have not prevented fatal aircraft accidents due to CO
poisoning. The NTSB is concerned about the continued hazards resulting from CO
poisoning because the FAA does not require CO detectors on enclosed-cabin
aircraft. The NTSB concludes that use of a functional CO detector to alert a pilot
through visual and auditory means to the presence of CO before the pilot’s judgment
is impaired is necessary to the continued safe operation of the aircraft. The NTSB also
concludes that CO detectors that do not meet an aviation-specific minimum
performance standard with active aural or visual alerting may not ensure the timely
detection of CO by pilots. Therefore, the NTSB recommends that the FAA require
that all enclosed-cabin aircraft with reciprocating engines be equipped with a CO
detector that complies with an aviation-specific minimum performance standard with
active aural or visual alerting.
In addition, the NTSB concludes that, while FAA action is pending, pilot
industry groups can quickly and effectively disseminate information to their members
and encourage operators to make safety changes to reduce the risks of CO
poisoning in flight. Therefore, the NTSB recommends that the Aircraft Owners and
Pilots Association and Experimental Aircraft Association inform their members about
the dangers of CO poisoning in flight and encourage them to install CO detectors
with active aural or visual alerting and proactively ensure thorough exhaust inspection
during regular maintenance.
