Aviation Investigation Report
NTSB/AIR-22-03
AIR-22-03
February 22, 2022
Require Common Traffic Advisory Frequency
Areas in Alaska
Introduction
The National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB) is providing the following
information to urge the Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) to take action on the
safety recommendations in this report. They are derived from our investigation of a
midair collision involving a de Havilland DHC-2 airplane and a Piper PA-12 airplane.
The NTSB is issuing two safety recommendations to the FAA.
Background and Analysis
On July 31, 2020, about 0827 Alaska daylight time (AKDT), a de Havilland
DHC-2 (Beaver) airplane, N4982U, and a Piper PA-12 airplane, N2587M, were
destroyed when they were involved in a midair collision near Soldotna, Alaska. The
pilot and five passengers on the DHC-2 were fatally injured, as was the pilot on the
PA-12. The midair collision occurred during day visual meteorological conditions.1
The float-equipped DHC-2 departed Longmere Lake, Soldotna, Alaska, about
0824 and was transporting passengers to a remote lake on the west side of Cook
Inlet. The PA-12 departed Soldotna Airport (SXQ) also about 0824 on a personal
flight, destined for Fairbanks, Alaska.
According to flight track data, after departure from SXQ, the PA-12 traveled on
a north-northeast heading until it crossed over a highway then turned right to an east-
northeast heading on a converging course with the DHC-2. After the DHC-2 departed
from Longmere Lake, it climbed on a west-northwest heading. The DHC-2 crossed
over the highway a few seconds after the PA-12. Both airplanes continued on their
respective headings and collided about 0827, about 2.5 miles northeast of SXQ, and
about 3 miles west of Longmere Lake, at an altitude of about 1,200 ft (see figure 1).
1 More information about this accident, NTSB case number, ANC20LA074, is available from the
NTSB's Case Analysis and Reporting Online (CAROL) query tool.
1

Aviation Investigation Report
NTSB/AIR-22-03
Figure 1. Radar data tracks for both airplanes and location of midair collision.
SXQ (the PA-12’s departure location) did not have an air traffic control tower
(ATCT). As a result, communication among aircraft departing SXQ and aircraft
transitioning the area was accomplished via the common traffic advisory frequency
(CTAF) of 122.5 MHz, which was published on the visual flight rules sectional chart
and FAA chart supplement for the area.2 Conversely, Longmere Lake (the departure
location for the DHC-2) was not listed as a charted seaplane base and did not have a
radio frequency published on the visual flight rules sectional or the FAA chart
supplement for the area. However, according to the chief pilot for the DHC-2
operator, the normal procedure for their operation was to monitor area traffic on the
SXQ CTAF channel (122.5 MHz).
While SXQ was the closest airport to Longmere Lake with a CTAF channel, the
NTSB’s investigation determined that 21 airports were within a 30-mile radius of SXQ,
with five different charted communication frequencies (one ATCT frequency and four
different CTAFs) (see figure 2), many of which overlapped.3 A postaccident
2 According to the FAA Aeronautical Information Manual (page 4-1-9), a CTAF is a frequency
designated for the purpose of carrying out airport advisory practices while operating to or from an
airport without an operating control tower. The CTAF may be a UNICOM, MULTICOM, flight service
station, or tower frequency and is identified in appropriate aeronautical publications.
3 Of the 21 airports, 16 were land-based airports, 4 were seaplane bases, and 1 was a heliport.
These airports were listed on the visual flight rules sectional and/or in the FAA Chart Supplement -
Alaska.
2

Aviation Investigation Report
NTSB/AIR-22-03
examination of both airplanes could not determine the radio frequencies selected at
the time of the accident.
Figure 2. CTAF locations within a 30-mile radius of SXQ (note: One additional CTAF, 123.05,
was used by oil platforms in Cook Inlet. Because its location frequently changed, it is not
indicated on figure 2).
Because both airplanes were operating in uncontrolled airspace, it was the
responsibility of both pilots to visually acquire aircraft flying in their vicinity and
maintain separation from them. This concept is referred to as “see-and-avoid.” As
discussed in NTSB Safety Alert 058, which was issued to help pilots avoid midair
collisions:
The “see-and-avoid” concept has long been the foundation of midair
collision prevention. However, the inherent limitations of this concept,
including human limitations, environmental conditions, aircraft blind
spots, and operational distractions, leave even the most diligent pilot
vulnerable to the threat of a midair collision with an unseen aircraft.4
4 For more information, see Safety Alert 058, Prevent Midair Collisions: Don’t Depend on Vision
Alone.
3

Aviation Investigation Report
NTSB/AIR-22-03
Pilot diligence in acquiring and avoiding other aircraft is particularly important
for operations in non-towered airport environments; pilots are responsible for
announcing their position near the airport and in the traffic pattern. To emphasize this
responsibility, FAA guidance (Advisory Circular 90-66B, Section 10.1) recommends
the following:
All traffic within a 10-mile radius of a non-towered airport or a part-time
towered airport when the control tower is not operating should continuously
monitor and communicate, as appropriate, on the designated CTAF until
leaving the area or until clear of the movement area.
The NTSB notes that, in the state of Alaska, only 13 airports have ATCTs, meaning that
most of the airports are non-towered.5
The prevention of midair collisions in Alaska has been a focus for the NTSB and
the aviation industry for many years. During the period from 2005 to 2020, 14 midair
collisions have occurred in the state, 12 of which occurred in uncontrolled airspace.
These midair collisions resulted in 35 fatalities and 15 serious injuries. After three
midair collisions occurred in the summer of 2011, a working group composed of
industry and government representatives was formed to examine and recommend
ways to mitigate this hazard.6
One of the accidents the working group examined involved two airplanes that
collided midair while operating in visual meteorological conditions; both were
preparing to land on Amber Lake in Talkeetna, Alaska (NTSB case number
ANC11FA071). The NTSB investigation revealed the pilots were communicating on
two different radio frequencies, and FAA guidance was unclear regarding which
CTAF frequency should be used in the area. Additionally, due to a high concentration
of airports in the area, many of the frequency boundaries overlapped. As a result of
this accident (and others), the working group evaluated published guidance
regarding CTAF usage and examined CTAF assignments, flight patterns, ATC
infrastructure, and the results of an Aircraft Owners and Pilots Association survey of
pilots.
5 According to the FAA’s webpage on the Alaska region, four ATCTs are in the Anchorage area,
three are in the Fairbanks area, and six are dispersed throughout the remainder of the state.
For more information, see https://www.faa.gov/about/office_org/headquarters_offices/ato/service_uni
ts/systemops/fs/alaskan/alaska/fai/atc/.
6 More information about these accidents, NTSB case numbers ANC11FA062, ANC11FA071, and
ANC11FA091, can be found using our CAROL query tool.
4

Aviation Investigation Report
NTSB/AIR-22-03
The working group submitted several recommendations to the FAA in the fall
of 2013.7 These recommendations included: (1) establishing discrete CTAF zones in
the Matanuska-Susitna Valley, the Cook Inlet area,8 and the Knik Glacier area;
(2) depicting these areas on the appropriate terminal area chart, the Alaska
supplement, and the appropriate visual flight rules sectional charts; and (3) changing
all airport CTAFs within these areas to be the same frequency. The FAA acted on
these recommendations, which went into effect in May 2014.
One of the FAA’s actions in response to the recommendations was to
designate new “CTAF areas” in the south-central region of Alaska within which all
airports would be on the same frequency, and overlap from adjacent airport
frequencies would be eliminated.9 These areas also depicted recognizable landmarks
to enable pilots to announce their location when near these landmarks.
The NTSB recognizes the FAA’s efforts in attempting to increase safety by
establishing CTAF areas within some parts of Alaska. However, since the CTAF areas
went into effect, four additional midair collisions have occurred within CTAF areas in
Alaska. We note that there is currently no FAA requirement for pilots to communicate
on the established frequencies within CTAF areas. The NTSB believes this lack of a
requirement hinders the intended safety benefit of the CTAF area.
For example, a Cessna 210 and a DHC-2 were involved in a midair collision in a
CTAF area in Wasilla, Alaska in 2016.10 The flight instructor and student pilot onboard
the Cessna were conducting practice takeoffs and landings in the traffic pattern, and
the pilot of the DHC-2 entered the traffic pattern from the north. A review of the CTAF
recording revealed the Cessna instructor made radio transmissions throughout the
first three traffic patterns, but no radio transmissions were heard from the Cessna
pilots during the final (accident) traffic pattern. If a requirement were in place for
pilots to report their position on each leg of the traffic pattern, it is possible the
Cessna pilots may have been more diligent in their position reports, and the DHC-2
pilot may have been aware of their presence.
We recognize that pilots who are in controlled airspace or otherwise in
communication with ATC will likely already be receiving traffic advisories and can’t be
expected to also communicate on the CTAF frequency. However, for pilots not in
7 For more information, see https://blog.aopa.org/aopa/2013/11/21/mat-su-traffic-working-group-
makes-recommendations/
8 The Cook Inlet area did not include Soldotna.
9 For more information, see https://blog.aopa.org/aopa/2014/05/14/mat-su-valley-ctaf-
frequencies-change-on-may-29th/.
10 More information about this accident, NTSB case number, ANC16FA052, can be found using
our CAROL tool.
5

Aviation Investigation Report
NTSB/AIR-22-03
contact with ATC, required communication on an established frequency when
operating in a CTAF area is an additional means to reduce the risk of a midair
collision. For example, in the Soldotna accident, the airplanes departed from different
locations, about 4 nautical miles apart, about the same time. They flew on converging
flightpaths for about 2 minutes until the collision. If a CTAF area had been established
for the Soldotna area and a requirement had been in place for pilots to communicate
their positions when entering the CTAF, the accident may have been avoided.
The NTSB concludes that without a requirement that pilots report their
positions on the designated CTAF frequency when operating in CTAF areas, pilots
may remain unaware of the presence of other airplanes even though a method of
communications exists; thus, the benefits of establishing CTAF areas are not fully
recognized. Therefore, the NTSB recommends that the FAA require all pilots to
monitor and communicate their positions on the designated CTAF when entering
and exiting dedicated CTAF areas throughout Alaska, as well as near established
reporting points and airport traffic patterns within the CTAF area, unless already
communicating with air traffic control.
We note that since the CTAFs were put in place in Alaska, we continue to see
midair collisions outside those designated CTAF areas. Of particular concern are
high-risk areas, such as (but not limited to) areas encompassing multiple airports with
different communication frequencies and high-traffic areas surrounding popular
scenic landmarks (these were some of the concerns that led to the creation of the
original CTAF areas).
For example, as discussed previously regarding the Soldotna accident, 21
airports were within a 30-mile radius of SXQ, with 5 different charted communication
frequencies, many of which overlapped. Additionally, in the Talkeetna accident
discussed previously, FAA guidance was unclear regarding which CTAF should be
used in the area and as a result, the pilots were communicating on two different radio
frequencies before the collision. These accidents demonstrate the possibility for
confusion regarding which frequency pilots should be using in a particular area.
Further, if pilots are communicating on two different frequencies within the same
area, they may not be aware of the presence of the other airplane.
One example of a midair collision that occurred in a high-traffic area
surrounding a popular scenic landmark occurred in Ketchikan, Alaska, in 2019. This
collision occurred in uncontrolled airspace (outside of all existing CTAF areas)
involving a DHC-2 and a DHC-3. Both were operating as sightseeing flights that
converged on the same scenic waterfall where they collided.11 The collision may have
11 More information about this accident, NTSB case number CEN19MA141, can be found using
our CAROL tool.
6

Aviation Investigation Report
NTSB/AIR-22-03
been avoided if the airspace near the waterfall had been part of a designated CTAF
area within which pilots were expected to report their position.
The NTSB concludes that pilots would benefit from the creation of additional
dedicated CTAF areas in locations where there is a high risk for midair collisions so
that pilots are more aware of nearby traffic and communicate on a single frequency in
one area, thus helping to mitigate the risk for midair collisions. Therefore, the NTSB
recommends that the FAA establish additional CTAF areas in locations throughout
Alaska at high risk of midair collisions, designate one frequency that is associated
with all non-towered airports within the geographical boundaries of these CTAF
areas, and define mandatory position reporting locations and reporting requirements
within these areas.
