DRAFT—Do Not Distribute Aviation Investigation Report
Report Number
July 3, 2025 Aviation Investigation Report: AIR-25-05
Improve Wind Detection Capabilities at Salt
Lake City International Airport
Introduction
The National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB) is providing the following
information to urge the Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) to take action on the
safety recommendations in this report. These recommendations are derived from
findings from our investigation of a July 2022 airplane accident in which a cargo pilot
encountered a microburst during an attempted go-around that caused the airplane to
descend and impact terrain, resulting in minor injury to the pilot and substantial damage
to the airplane.1 The NTSB is issuing two new safety recommendations to the FAA.
Background and Analysis
On July 13, 2022, about 1852 mountain daylight time, a Cessna 208B airplane,
N877FE, impacted terrain after encountering a microburst during an attempted
go-around at Salt Lake City International Airport (SLC) in Utah. The pilot stated that, after
an initial landing attempt, he decided to go around because he was unable to maintain
directional control of the airplane due to wind from the left, and he informed the local
controller about the go-around. After adding power and climbing to about 30 ft above
ground level, he “lowered the left wing” to counteract the drift from the runway
centerline. Subsequently, he encountered a microburst that caused the airplane to
descend before impacting terrain, off the right side of the runway, in a left-wing-low
attitude. The pilot sustained minor injuries, and the airplane sustained substantial
damage to the wings and fuselage. The airplane was operated as a Title 14 Code of
Federal Regulations (CFR) Part 135 cargo flight from Friedman Memorial Airport (SUN),
Hailey, Idaho, to SLC.2
The NTSB determined the probable cause of the accident was the pilot’s inability
to maintain control of the airplane when it encountered a microburst during a landing
1 The FAA defines a microburst as a small downburst with outbursts of damaging winds extending
2.5 miles or less that can induce wind speeds as high as 150 knots.
2 Visit ntsb.gov to find additional information in the public docket for this NTSB investigation
(case number WPR22LA251). Use the CAROL Query to search safety recommendations and investigations.
1

Aviation Investigation Report
AIR-25-05
attempt and a go-around near known thunderstorm activity.3 Contributing to the
accident was an inadequate amount of wind sensors and wind shear detection
equipment used by the air traffic control (ATC) tower to detect microburst activity at the
airport.
At 1848, 4 minutes before the accident, the ATC tower at SLC reported a wind
gust of 16 knots; this report, based on information received from automatic terminal
information service, only used information from the center field/airport wind sensor,
located 8,700 ft north of the accident site.4 (According to postaccident interviews, this
was the only sensor available for distributing tactical wind information to pilots and
determining runway configuration.) However, the airport’s automated surface observing
system (ASOS), located 5,000 ft south-southeast of the accident site, reported wind
between 25 and 29 knots with gusts to 48 knots. ATC and the wind shear detection
system did not have access to the ASOS wind information, and the pilot was not aware of
it. About 1 minute before the accident, the ATC tower broadcasted a blanket wind shear
alert, and the airport’s wind shear display systems indicated a microburst about
10 minutes after the accident.
Thunderstorms were forecast for SLC in several different weather forecast
products, including a terminal aerodrome forecast, graphical forecast for aviation, and a
convective Significant Meteorological Information (SIGMET) that was issued after the
pilot had departed from SUN and was valid for the accident site. The pilot was aware of
thunderstorms west of SLC and used next generation weather radar to track them while
en route. He noted, however, that information was delayed by 10 minutes.5
A convective SIGMET implies the potential for wind shear, lightning, and severe
turbulence, among other things. Rain showers and convective clouds can produce
downdrafts, outflow boundaries, and gust fronts during the mature and decaying stages
of the convective cloud lifecycle, which can create an environment favorable for
unexpected changes in surface wind direction and speed. Flight operations in such
conditions can result in pilots’ inability to climb out of, or safely transition away from, the
3 The FAA defines windshear as a sudden, drastic change in wind speed and/or direction over a
very small area.
4 The automatic terminal information service is a continuous broadcast of recorded non-control
information in selected terminal areas. Its purpose is to improve controller effectiveness and to relieve
frequency congestion by automating repetitive transmissions of essential but routine information.
5 Although the airplane was equipped with onboard weather radar, the pilot did not turn it on
because the altitude of the thunderstorms was outside of the radar’s range. In addition, company policy
instructed pilots to turn off the radar before landing.
2

Aviation Investigation Report
AIR-25-05
weather, potentially resulting in loss of airplane control. The figure below is a diagram of
the lifecycle of a microburst originating from a convective cloud with precipitation.
Figure. Diagram of the lifecycle of a microburst. (Source: Advances in Mechanical Engineering)
The NTSB’s investigation of this accident found that, in November 2015, SLC ATC
management requested that the FAA update the surface weather system and install five
additional wind sensors (one for each runway end). However, the request was denied in
April 2016 for budgetary reasons.
An event similar to the July 2022 accident occurred in September 2016 when the
flight crew of an Embraer ERJ 170/175 ER/LR operating under 14 CFR Part 121 diverted
after encountering a microburst while on approach to SLC. ATC advised the flight crew
of heavy precipitation between the aircraft and the runway and reported that storms
were passing, and wind conditions were 16 knots and steady with no low-level wind
shear alerts; therefore, the captain decided to attempt a single approach. However,
5 seconds after the airplane intercepted the final approach vector and the captain
started configuring flaps, the airplane encountered a microburst, and its airspeed rapidly
increased from 190 knots to 234 knots. The airspeed did not return to normal during the
approach before the captain diverted and landed the airplane uneventfully.
Similarly, the first officer of a 14 CFR Part 121 air carrier submitted an aviation
safety reporting system report in December 2016 that wind conditions on the approach
to SLC outside the final approach fix were sustained at 40 knots from about 190º.6 The
6 The aviation safety reporting system (ASRS) is a national database of voluntary reports submitted
by pilots and other aviation professionals to alert others about a potentially unsafe condition or event
experienced during line operations. Although ASRS reports are useful for identifying safety issues, they do
not provide a basis for determining the magnitude of a problem since additional professionals may
experience the same safety issue without submitting a report.
3

Aviation Investigation Report
AIR-25-05
flight then entered an area of precipitation where the wind immediately changed from
190º at 40 knots to 290º at 38 knots. This significant change in wind speed and direction,
which is characteristic of a wind shear, resulted in a flap overspeed.7 The captain
immediately executed a go-around and landed the airplane without further incident.
As the circumstances of these events show, the SLC tower’s current lack of
capability to maintain real-time awareness of microburst activity near and around the
airport has led to recurring instances of pilots unexpectedly encountering sudden
changes in wind direction and speed. Such encounters have the potential to result in
more critical outcomes than the SLC events described.
For example, on August 2, 1985, Delta Air Lines flight 191, a Lockheed L-1011,
crashed while approaching to land on runway 17L at Dallas Fort Worth International
Airport (DFW), Dallas, Texas. While passing through rain beneath a thunderstorm,
flight 191 entered a microburst, which the flight crew was not able to pass through
successfully. The airplane struck the ground about 6,300 ft north of the approach end of
runway 17L, hit a car on a highway (fatally injuring the driver), and struck two water tanks
on the airport before breaking apart. Of the 163 airplane occupants, 126 passengers
and 8 crewmembers were fatally injured, 14 passengers and 1 crewmember were
seriously injured, 10 passengers and 2 crewmembers sustained minor injuries, and
2 passengers were uninjured. The NTSB determined the probable cause of this accident
was, in part, “the lack of definitive, real-time wind shear hazard information.”8
(NTSB 1986).
To improve its wind detection capabilities, DFW began using an integrated
terminal weather system (ITWS) in1995. ITWS is composed of algorithms that use data
from the terminal doppler weather radar (TDWR) to detect and warn ATC of dangerous
wind shear. A low-level wind shear alerting system-network expansion (LLWAS-NE) was
also integrated into the ITWS to provide ATC with a complete set of alerts. The 19
individual sensors strategically positioned near all of DFW’s runways determine the
validity of the wind shear alerts produced by the LLWAS-NE, and the ITWS is able to
detect wind shear events that can be missed by the TDWR alone.
The December 20, 2008, accident involving Continental Airlines flight 1404 is
another example of an accident resulting from a flight crew’s unexpected encounter with
7 Flap overspeed occurs when an airplane's airspeed exceeds the maximum speed allowed with
the flaps extended, often represented by Vfe on the airspeed indicator. This condition can lead to damage
or loss of the flaps or other structural damage to the airplane.
8 The NTSB’s full probable cause for this accident was “the flight crew’s decision to initiate and
continue the approach into a cumulonimbus cloud, which they observed to contain visible lightning; the
lack of specific guidelines, procedures, and training for avoiding and escaping from low-altitude wind
shear; and the lack of definitive, real-time wind shear hazard information. This resulted in the aircraft’s
encounter at low altitude with a microburst-induced, severe wind shear from a rapidly developing
thunderstorm located on the final approach course.”
4

Aviation Investigation Report
AIR-25-05
a sudden change in wind direction and speed. During takeoff from runway 34R at
Denver International Airport (DEN), Denver, Colorado, the Boeing 737-500 encountered
a strong crosswind and departed the left side of the runway. A postcrash fire ensued. Of
the 115 occupants onboard, the captain and 5 passengers were seriously injured; three
crewmembers and 38 passengers received minor injuries; and 1 cabin crewmember and
67 passengers (3 of whom were lap-held children) were uninjured. The NTSB
determined that a contributing factor to this accident was “an air traffic control system
that did not require or facilitate the dissemination of key, available wind information to
the air traffic controllers and pilots.”9 (NTSB 2009).
At the time of the accident at DEN, mountain-wave conditions were present that
resulted in strong westerly wind conditions and very localized, intermittent wind gusts as
high as 45 knots that crossed the airplane’s path during the takeoff ground roll.10 After
the accident, the wind sensing capability at the airport was improved to provide wind
shear and/or microburst alerts when those conditions are present. The FAA improved
DEN’s existing LLWAS systems by upgrading software and hardware, integrating the
system with the airport’s TDWR and ITWS, and adding sensors along runway approach
and departure corridors.11 This airport is also equipped with the LLWAS-NE rehost
system, which is designed to continuously collect and analyze wind data from 32 remote
sensor stations located on and around the airport.12 The improved wind sensing
capability has enabled ATC personnel to support pilots in making more informed
decisions before departing and landing.
SLC is located downwind of mountainous terrain and is susceptible to similar
mountain-wave-related wind hazards as DEN. However, SLC currently lacks similar wind
detection capabilities, which provide real-time detection of wind shear, microbursts, gust
9 The NTSB’s full probable cause for this accident was “the captain’s cessation of right rudder input,
which was needed to maintain directional control of the airplane, about 4 seconds before the excursion,
when the airplane encountered a strong and gusty crosswind that exceeded the captain’s training and
experience. Contributing to the accident were the following factors: 1) an air traffic control system that did
not require or facilitate the dissemination of key, available wind information to the air traffic controllers and
pilots; and 2) inadequate crosswind training in the airline industry due to deficient simulator wind gust
modeling.”
10 According to information in FAA-H-8083-28A, Aviation Weather Handbook, mountain waves are
characterized by a series of upward and downward motions in the atmosphere. These motions can extend
both vertically and horizontally for considerable distances downwind.
11 DEN’s ITWS continuously gathers information from LLWAS, ASOS, and other airport weather
data sources and integrates and displays the information for use by DEN ATC personnel. If wind shear
and/or microburst conditions do exist, related alerts are displayed to air traffic controllers on the ribbon
display terminals in the tower.
12 The 32 sensors report wind information at 10-second intervals and are positioned to provide
wind speed and direction for all runway surfaces to determine whether wind shear and/or microburst
conditions exist.
5

Aviation Investigation Report
AIR-25-05
fronts, and wind shifts. The installation of an LLWAS-NE system along with the addition of
wind sensors placed at the various runways at DEN, as well as DFW, has improved
aircraft efficiency and overall safety by preventing wind shear-related aircraft accidents,
and could do the same at SLC.
Therefore, the NTSB concludes that SLC’s susceptibility to convective, mountain-
wave, and additional wind-related hazards warrants an enhancement of its current wind
detection capabilities to improve tower controllers’ awareness of such hazards and their
ability to alert pilots before departure and arrival. Therefore, the NTSB recommends the
FAA install an LLWAS-NE system at SLC and add the appropriate number of wind
sensors based on land area coverage and terrain features to detect and warn of
microburst activity.
The NTSB notes that these weather-related concerns may apply to other Part 139
airports and concludes that wind sensing capabilities at other Part 139 airports may need
to be similarly enhanced to support tower controllers’ ability to alert pilots about wind
hazards in a timely manner. Therefore, the NTSB recommends, as part of its ATC
modernization efforts, the FAA ensure that all Part 139 airports within the National
Airspace System that are susceptible to mountain wave and convective-related wind
hazards have sufficient wind detection capabilities to warn of windshear and microburst
activity in real time.
