Aviation Investigation Report
NTSB/AIR-22-04
AIR-22-04
April 12, 2022
Loss of Engine Power due to Excessive Fuel
Flow in Cirrus SR22T Aircraft
Introduction
The National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB) is providing the following
information to urge Cirrus Aircraft and the Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) to
take action on the safety recommendations in this report. They are derived from
previous investigations of Cirrus SR22T accidents in which excessive fuel introduced
to the engine during takeoff climb led to engine power loss. Our examination of
these investigations suggests a lack of system safety assessments to identify the cause
and reduce the potential of the hazard from occurring. The NTSB is issuing one safety
recommendation to Cirrus and one safety recommendation to the FAA.
Background and Analysis
The NTSB has identified six accidents involving Cirrus SR22T airplanes in which
an excessive fuel condition led to a loss of engine power during the takeoff climb (see
the appendix to this report for more information on these accidents).1 During the
investigations of five of the accidents, fuel flow data were retrieved from the
recoverable data modules (RDM) installed in the accident airplanes.2 In each case, the
fuel flow data indicated an excessively high fuel flow (ranging from 42.2 to
50.1 gallons per hour [gph]) to the engine just before the loss of power. According to
1 The NTSB conducted the investigations of five of these accidents (NTSB case numbers WPR18FA093,
WPR17FA150, WPR18LA256, ANC18LA004, CEN19LA002). More information about these
investigations can be found using our CAROL (Case Analysis and Reporting Online) query tool. The Air
Accidents Investigation Branch in the United Kingdom conducted the sixth accident investigation.
More information about this accident investigation is available at
https://assets.publishing.service.gov.uk/media/5f1ad574e90e074567f1f828/Cirrus_SR22T_2-
RORO_07-20.pdf.
2 The RDM could not be located during the United Kingdom investigation.
1

Aviation Investigation Report
NTSB/AIR-22-04
Cirrus, during takeoff climb, the electric fuel pump could deliver 19 gph (in the
BOOST position) to 42 gph (in the HIGH BOOST/PRIME position).3
While excessive fuel flow was determined to be the cause for the engine
failures in all six accidents, the cause for the excessive fuel flow could be determined
in just three cases: two investigations determined that the suspected incorrect
selection of the fuel pump’s HIGH BOOST/PRIME position caused the excessive fuel
flow, and the third investigation cited an improperly adjusted slope controller and
fuel pump.4
The two accidents in which the selected fuel pump position was suspected to
cause the excessive fuel flow occurred in Schellville, California, and Kennett,
Missouri.5 In the July 2017 accident in Schellville, California, RDM data revealed that
the fuel flow peaked 6.5% higher than average during climbout just before the loss of
engine power. Further, both the fuel flow and manifold pressure exceeded the
manufacturer’s parameters for takeoff, peaking about the time of the engine power
loss. The RDM data were consistent with the electric fuel pump switch being selected
to the HIGH BOOST/PRIME position, but, because the fuel pump switch position is
not a recorded parameter on the RDM (and the cabin sustained impact damage), the
investigation could not definitively determine the switch’s position.
In the September 2018 accident in Kennett, Missouri, the investigation
revealed that the pilot likely repositioned the fuel pump switch while attempting to
untangle his headset cord, resulting in a loss of engine power at an altitude of about
200 ft. In this case, investigators observed the fuel pump switch in the HIGH
BOOST/PRIME position after the accident.
The third investigation in which the cause for the excessive fuel flow could be
determined occurred in October 2017 in Tuskegee, Alabama.6 The postaccident
examination revealed that when the throttle was advanced through a manifold
pressure of about 36 inches of mercury, the fuel flow exceeded the engine
manufacturer’s full throttle high-side limit. After the slope controller was adjusted to
reduce manifold pressure to that specified by Cirrus, the engine operated without
any interruption in power. Thus, the excessively high fuel flow (and subsequent loss of
engine power) experienced during the accident was likely caused by an improperly
adjusted slope controller.
To address the potential for engine power loss due to excessive fuel flow
during takeoff caused by the incorrect selection of the electric fuel pump switch in the
3 The BOOST position is used for vapor suppression during takeoff, climb, and landing and when
switching fuel tanks; the HIGH BOOST/PRIME position is used for priming the engine before start and
suppressing vapor formation at flight altitudes above 18,000 ft.
4 The slope controller limits oil flow, through a wastegate, on a turbocharged engine.
5 Accident numbers WPR17FA150 and WPR18LA256, respectively.
6 Accident number ANC18LA004.
2

Aviation Investigation Report
NTSB/AIR-22-04
HIGH BOOST/PRIME position, Cirrus took several steps. First, on May 7, 2018, Cirrus
issued Service Advisory SA18-02 applicable to SR22T airplanes. The advisory
provided the following information:
In accordance with, and as a reminder about, the language in the Pilot’s
Operating Handbook, the intended use of the fuel pump HIGH
BOOST/PRIME position is priming prior to engine start and suppressing
vapor formation in flight above 18,000 feet with hot fuel. The fuel pump
must be set to BOOST – but not HIGH/BOOST/PRIME – for takeoff,
climb, landing, and for switching fuel tanks. The pilot should monitor
fuel flow during takeoff. Fuel flow should never exceed 41 gallons per
hour (GPH) at 36.5 inches of manifold pressure. Higher fuel flow rates
may result in a rough running engine and/or loss of power.
Also in May 2018, Cirrus implemented software changes intended to prevent
improper operation of the electric fuel boost pump on the SR22T. The approach
consisted of a software-controlled lockout feature for in-service SR22T airplanes and
was explained in two service bulletins (SBs) that differed slightly as a function of
whether the airplanes were equipped with the "Perspective" or "Perspective Plus"
avionics platforms.7 This feature locks out the high boost function of the pump (if
HIGH BOOST/PRIME is selected) until the airplane reaches a pressure altitude of
10,000 ft; this prevents an engine power loss at low altitudes due to improper
selection of the pump to the HIGH BOOST/PRIME position. The software changes
included an updated HIGH FUEL FLOW crew alerting system message on the primary
flight display.8 All subsequent new production Cirrus airplanes were equipped with
the lockout software.
Following pilot reports of the lockout feature not operating as intended, on
January 22, 2019, Cirrus issued Service Advisory SA19-01, which stated:
Cirrus has been made aware of a Garmin software condition where the
HIGH BOOST/PRIME altitude lockout feature is not functional in
[software version] 2647.N1. This condition allows HIGH BOOST/PRIME
fuel pump mode to be enabled below 10,000 feet. Use of HIGH
7 Perspective Plus-equipped airplanes were first addressed by SB2X-42-14, issued on May 30, 2018,
and superseded by SB2X-42-18R3, issued on September 12, 2019 (updated June 3, 2020).
Perspective-equipped airplanes were first addressed by SB2X-42-15, issued on November 14, 2018,
and superseded by SB2X-42-17, issued on March 18, 2019.
8 According to Cirrus, the HIGH FUEL FLOW warning is triggered by a flow rate greater than 41 gph.
As indicated in SA18-02, if fuel flow exceeds 41 gph, “further flight operations should be discontinued
until the engine fuel pump is serviced in accordance with the manufacturer’s approved Instructions for
Continued Airworthiness.” Part of the engine inspection, per the engine manufacturer, includes
checking and adjusting manifold pressure via the slope controller.
3

Aviation Investigation Report
NTSB/AIR-22-04
BOOST/PRIME fuel pump mode in flight below 10,000 feet is not
recommended and should be avoided.
SA19-01 further stated that until a software update is released to address this
condition, the use of “HIGH BOOST/PRIME fuel pump mode should only be required,
in flight, above 18,000 feet on hot days with warm or hot fuel to maintain fuel flow in
the green arc or to suppress vapor formation.” The FAA did not mandate compliance
with the service advisories or any of the SBs for in-service airplanes.
The NTSB recognizes that Cirrus has attempted to mitigate, through the
service advisories, SBs, and avionics software updates, the hazard of excessive fuel
flow to the engine when the HIGH BOOST/PRIME fuel pump mode is inappropriately
selected. While these updates will lockout HIGH BOOST/PRIME fuel pump mode
during takeoff, we do not have evidence that this is what caused the excessive fuel
flow in three of the accidents cited in this report. Thus, it is unclear whether the
software updates will adequately address all excessive fuel conditions during takeoff.
Additionally, Cirrus did not consider pilot performance related to recognition,
reaction time, and recovery from an engine power loss at low altitude. For example,
do pilots know what to do when they receive a crew alerting system message at low
altitude so that they can recover the airplane?
As stated above, the NTSB was only able to identify the cause of the excessive
fuel flow in three of the SR22T accidents we investigated. We believe that all the
potential causes for these failures need to be identified to fully address this hazard. A
functional hazard assessment (FHA) is a top-down process that can be used to
examine system functions to identify all potential failure conditions and classify the
associated hazards.9 An FHA is normally performed early in the development and
certification of an aircraft but should also be updated as new functions or failure
conditions are identified. Once an FHA is completed, a system safety assessment
associates a probability to each failure condition. Although Cirrus performed many
FHAs during the initial certification process of the SR22T, as of December 15, 2021,
Cirrus had not performed an FHA for excessive fuel flow during takeoff and climb
resulting in a loss of engine power.
The NTSB is concerned that, because there may be additional potential causes
for excessive fuel flow-related engine failures that have not yet been identified, they
will continue to occur despite Cirrus’ software updates. Therefore, the NTSB
concludes that the Cirrus SR22T can experience a loss of engine power due to
excessive fuel flow and some causes of excessive fuel flow during takeoff and climb
may have not been identified and mitigated. The NTSB recommends that Cirrus
9 FAA Advisory Circular 23.1309-1E, System Safety Analysis and Assessment for Part 23 Airplanes,
dated November 17, 2011, provides guidance and information for demonstrating compliance with the
requirements for equipment, systems, and installations in airplanes manufactured under 14 Code of
Federal Regulations Part 23 (normal-category airplanes).
4

Aviation Investigation Report
NTSB/AIR-22-04
conduct an FHA to identify the causes, effects, and severity levels for the SR22T
excessive fuel flow hazard condition during takeoff and climb phases of flight and,
based on the FHA, update the system safety assessment.
The NTSB notes that while identifying the failure modes for excessive fuel flow
in Cirrus SR22T airplanes during takeoff and climb is a safety improvement, more
needs to be done to prevent the condition from occurring. The next step in the
system safety process and, arguably, the most important, is identifying mitigating
actions—such as design modifications, operational procedures, and/or guidance to
operators—for each failure mode. Although Cirrus Aircraft can implement mitigating
actions for the SR22T, unless Cirrus Aircraft and the individual operators are required
to implement the mitigations, the actions may not be performed.10
The NTSB concludes that until the FAA requires implementation of appropriate
mitigating actions to prevent the loss of engine power due to excessive fuel flow in
the SR22T, additional accidents may occur due to this hazard. Therefore, the NTSB
recommends that the FAA review the FHA recommended in Safety Recommendation
A-22-7 and ensure it meets the objectives of Advisory Circular 23.1309-1E. Upon
approval of the FHA, work with Cirrus to identify necessary mitigating actions and
require their implementation through the appropriate means, such as an
airworthiness directive.
