Aviation Investigation Report
AIR-22-09
November 16, 2022 Aviation Investigation Report AIR-22-09
Implement Special Federal Aviation Regulation
for Air Tours near Ketchikan, Alaska
Introduction
The National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB) is providing the following
information to urge the Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) and the National
Weather Service to take action on the safety recommendations in this report. These
recommendations are derived from findings from the investigation of an August 2021
air tour airplane accident in Ketchikan, Alaska, as well as from our review of previous
investigations of Title 14 Code of Federal Regulations (CFR) Part 135 air tour airplane
accidents near Ketchikan since 2007.1 As discussed in this report, despite the FAA’s
efforts since 2008 to encourage operators to voluntarily adopt processes and
procedures to improve the safety of air tour airplane flights in the Ketchikan area,
these operations continue to be vulnerable to the hazards unique to the area’s terrain
and weather conditions. The NTSB is issuing three new safety recommendations, two
of which supersede previously issued safety recommendations.
Background and Analysis
On August 5, 2021, a De Havilland DHC-2 airplane, N1249K, which was
operated as a Part 135 air tour, impacted heavily wooded, mountainous terrain near
Ketchikan. The pilot and five passengers were fatally injured, and the airplane was
destroyed. A review of weather camera imagery, forecasts, weather observations, and
passenger photographs revealed that while the pilot was conducting the flight under
visual flight rules (VFR), the airplane entered a narrow valley and encountered
deteriorating weather. As the cloud cover increased and visibility was reduced due to
precipitation and mist, passenger photographs show that the pilot flew at lower
altitudes, consistent with a passenger report from the pilot’s previous flight where he
attempted to remain below the cloud ceiling and avoid entering instrument
meteorological conditions (IMC). On the accident flight, the airplane impacted
1 Appendix A contains a list of investigations that support these safety recommendations.
1

Aviation Investigation Report
AIR-22-09
mountainous terrain in IMC.2 The NTSB determined the probable cause of this
accident to be, in part, “the pilot’s decision to continue visual flight rules (VFR) flight
into instrument meteorological conditions (IMC), which resulted in controlled flight
into terrain.”
Based on passenger photographs and videos, the accident pilot likely flew
close to the right side of the valley where the accident occurred. Ketchikan air tour
pilots typically fly along the side of valleys to avoid collisions with other aircraft or to
provide more room to reverse course if they observe deteriorating weather ahead,
such as low clouds or poor visibility (see the accident valley in figure 1). However,
many valleys in the area are too narrow for an airplane to make a full 180° turn to
avoid entering or to escape an inadvertent entry into IMC.3 In postaccident
interviews, two pilots familiar with the valley where the accident occurred stated that
they thought it was likely too narrow to safely execute a 180° turn in an airplane.
Figure 1. August 2021 accident location with obscured mountaintops and reduced visibility.
(Source: NTSB)
Note: The picture was taken at a later date during the NTSB’s investigation of the August 2021 accident.
2 Visit ntsb.gov to find additional information in the public docket for this NTSB investigation (case
number ANC21FA069). Use the CAROL Query to search safety recommendations and investigations.
3 A valley that is too narrow for an airplane to turn around in may allow for an air tour helicopter to
turn around because it has more maneuverability than an airplane. Some Ketchikan operators also
instruct pilots of float-equipped airplanes who are caught in localized cloud cover to temporarily land
on a lake—if the valley has one—rather than attempt to navigate in the clouds; however, many valleys in
the area do not have lakes suitable for landing.
2

Aviation Investigation Report
AIR-22-09
During Ketchikan’s high-traffic air tour season between April and September,
about a dozen operators conduct Part 135 air tours, flying airplanes as low as 500 ft
above ground level (agl) so passengers can view the remote, rugged terrain of the
southeastern portion of the Alaskan Panhandle near the Misty Fjords National
Monument.4 A review of NTSB accident investigations between 2007 and 2021
identified seven Part 135 air tour airplane accidents (five fatal, including the above
accident) in the Ketchikan area, in which 31 people died and 13 were seriously
injured. Of the five fatal air tour airplane accidents, three involved VFR flight into
IMC.5
Pilots conduct air tours such as the accident flight under VFR to facilitate
passengers’ view of the landscape. However, cloudy and rainy conditions are
regularly present around the Ketchikan area due to a persistent onshore wind from
the southwest that carries abundant moisture from the Pacific Ocean.6 In addition, the
persistent weather systems in the southeastern Alaska Panhandle, which create the
area’s temperate rainforest, can funnel wind and precipitation into the area’s valleys,
with clouds increasing as the weather systems encounter the mountains. These
weather patterns helped create the type of rapidly changing, localized cloud cover
that the air tour involved in the August 2021 accident encountered. Passenger
photographs show that the top of the mountainous terrain near the accident location
was obscured by cloud cover (see figure 2). Airplane pilots are at risk of impacting the
area’s high terrain if they continue into cloudy conditions that obscure mountains,
which may not be obvious when pilots turn to enter valleys.
4 a) The number of Ketchikan air tour operators varies by year; in 2019, there were 14 operators,
and in 2021, there were 10 operators. b) When the FAA issued its final rule for
14 CFR Part 136 Subpart A, “National Air Tour Safety Standards,” in 2007, it noted that air tours across
the country are normally conducted between 500 and 1,500 ft agl. National Archives and Records
Administration (NARA). 2007. “National Air Tour Safety Standards; Final Rule.” Federal Register.
Vol. 72. Washington, DC: NARA, February 13, 2007. 6883.
5 Of the remaining two fatal air tour accidents, one involved takeoff into high wind conditions, and
the other involved a midair collision with another aircraft. Of the two nonfatal air tour accidents, one
involved a water takeoff, and the other involved a water landing.
6 With an average yearly rainfall of about 150 inches, Ketchikan is one of the rainiest cities in
Alaska. For more precipitation information, see the Western Regional Climate Center’s Climate
Summary for Ketchikan.
3

Aviation Investigation Report
AIR-22-09
Figure 2. Photographs taken by passengers from the August 2021 accident flight. (Source:
NTSB)
The minimum flight altitude, ceiling, and visibility requirements that apply to
Part 135 airplane operations across the country, including air tours in the Ketchikan
area, specify that airplanes must fly above 500 ft agl (14 CFR 135.203) and, when the
ceiling is less than 1,000 ft agl, flight visibility must be at least 2 statute miles
(14 CFR 135.205). Further, when operating in class G airspace, such as that in the
vicinity of the accident site, daytime VFR airplane flights are required only to remain
clear of clouds (14 CFR 91.155).7 During postaccident interviews as part of the August
2021 accident investigation, the director of operations from another Ketchikan air
tour operation stated that area air tour pilots routinely need to decide whether the
current weather conditions are good enough to safely fly VFR.
To address the operational hazards of flying air tours in the Ketchikan area’s
terrain and weather conditions, operators active in Ketchikan established a voluntary
letter of agreement (LOA) in 2009 that was intended to foster compliance with
7 The national air tour standards (14 CFR Part 136 Subpart A) do not address minimum flight
altitudes or visibility; they do address passenger briefings, life preservers, and helicopter-specific
items.
4

Aviation Investigation Report
AIR-22-09
operational elements such as standard routes, reporting points, and best practices.8
Although the operator of the August 2021 accident flight was a signatory of this
voluntary LOA, compliance with the LOA was not required, and the accident pilot was
not following the standard routes in the LOA at the time of the accident as shown in
figure 3.
Figure 3. August 2021 accident flight track compared to the standard tour routes in the LOA.
(Source: Tongass Aircraft Pilots Association)
Note: The red lines are the LOA’s outbound standard routes, the blue line is the LOA’s inbound standard route,
and the yellow line with red dots is the accident airplane’s flight track.
During postaccident interviews as part of the August 2021 investigation,
personnel from two participating Ketchikan operations said that their employers were
doing their best to follow the operational elements of the LOA, but the personnel
stressed that it was a voluntary agreement. In addition, two pilots and one FAA
8 a) Originally created by Tongass Aircraft Pilots Association operators on January 15, 2009, and
updated at least twice since in response to subsequent accidents, the LOA covers standard tour
routes, frequencies, altitudes, reporting points, choke points, nonstandard routes, and best practices
but does not include weather minimums. The LOA was last updated on May 8, 2021, and 10 operators
were signatories at that time. The Tongass Aircraft Pilots Association was originally formed to address
safety issues, air traffic congestion, communications, and noise considerations in southeast Alaska. For
more information, including a copy of the most recent version of the LOA, see the Tongass Aircraft
Pilots Association website. b) The Ketchikan operator LOA, which is a voluntary local agreement by
area operators, is not a letter of authorization required by the FAA for air tour flights that begin and
end at the same airport and are conducted within 25 statute miles, as identified in 14 CFR 119(e)(2).
5

Aviation Investigation Report
AIR-22-09
inspector described how pilots would deviate from the operational elements in the
LOA, such as by flying nonstandard routes. The FAA inspector also said the FAA was
limited to encouraging voluntary participation and that the continuing accidents since
the operators established the LOA in 2009 showed that the LOA was not effective.
The NTSB determined that the FAA’s reliance on voluntary compliance with the LOA
was a contributing factor in the August 2021 accident.
Weather Minimums and Voluntary Operator Safety Actions
For Ketchikan-area air tours, the rapidly changing weather conditions specific
to the region and the surrounding mountainous terrain represent overlapping
hazards, and Part 135 VFR minimums often provide an insufficient safety margin to
enable air tour pilots to avoid entering or escaping an inadvertent encounter with
IMC in that environment. Based on our findings in the investigations of several fatal
air tour accidents that occurred in the Ketchikan and Southeast Alaska area, the NTSB
issued 13 total safety recommendations to the FAA in 2008 and 2017 aimed at
improving air tour safety in the Ketchikan area; however, many of the resulting
solutions adopted by the FAA involved voluntary operator actions that have proven
ineffective or are no longer in effect.9
We issued the first four safety recommendations, A-08-59 through -62 (which
focused on weather, training, and FAA oversight of safe flying practices), following a
fatal July 2007 accident in Ketchikan and four similar accidents in southeast Alaska.10
Although we classified these four safety recommendations as either “Closed—
Acceptable Action” or “Closed—Acceptable Alternate Action” based on the FAA’s
actions, we later found that air tour operators in Southeast Alaska continued certain
unsafe flying practices, such as conducting flights below FAA minimum altitudes and
9 Appendix B lists the NTSB’s 13 previously issued safety recommendations that addressed the
weather, route, and terrain hazards in Southeast Alaska.
10 For additional information about the five accidents near Ketchikan and Juneau referenced in the
2008 report, search the public docket for case numbers ANC99FA073, ANC99FA139, ANC01FA093,
ANC06LA066, and ANC07FA068. For more information on the 2008 recommendations, see NTSB.
2008. Letter from Chairman Mark V. Rosenker to Robert A. Sturgell, Administrator, Federal Aviation
Administration, issuing Safety Recommendations A-08-59 through -62, July 31. Washington, DC: NTSB.
6

Aviation Investigation Report
AIR-22-09
VFR weather minimums, and that some of the actions taken by the FAA in response to
our recommendations, including training, were no longer in effect.11
Following the July 2007 accident, the accident operator made voluntary
operational changes, including signing the voluntary operator LOA and imposing a
4-mile flight visibility minimum for its flights in the Ketchikan area, which was more
conservative than the 2-mile requirement specified in 14 CFR 135.205.12 The July
2007 accident operator maintained this more conservative visibility minimum and, on
June 25, 2015, it cancelled its air tours because weather conditions were below its
more restrictive voluntary minimum. However, another local operator booked
passengers from those cancelled air tours that day; one of the rebooked air tour
flights encountered IMC and collided with mountainous, tree-covered terrain,
resulting in nine fatalities.
Following our investigation of the June 2015 accident, the NTSB issued Safety
Recommendation A-17-43 asking the FAA to do the following:
Develop and implement special operating rules for the Ketchikan air
tour industry that include en route visual flight rules weather minimums
that are tailored to the industry’s unique requirements and are more
conservative than those specified in 14 Code of Federal Regulations
Part 135.13
On July 21, 2017, the FAA responded that it was evaluating policy and
rulemaking options to address this recommendation. The FAA also reported that,
through its controlled flight into terrain initiative, the agency would focus on
operators’ voluntary adoption of safety items including “visual flight rules route
structures, segmented altitudes, higher weather minimums, specific decision points,
11 Safety Recommendation A-08-60 asked the FAA to provide monthly en route and ground-based
observations of air tour flights in Southeast Alaska. In response, the FAA stated that it had permanently
added en route inspections of air tour operators to FAA Order 1800.56, “National Flight Standards
Work Program,” and established a special emphasis program to ensure surveillance in southeast
Alaska. In 2014, the NTSB classified Safety Recommendation A-08-60 as “Closed—Acceptable Alternate
Action.” Safety Recommendations A-08-61 and -62, which focused on training, are addressed in the
next section. See appendix B for more information about Safety Recommendation A-08-59, which
focused on weather cameras.
12 For more information, see NTSB. 2017. Collision with Terrain, Promech Air, Inc., de Havilland
DHC-3, N270PA, Ketchikan, Alaska, June 25, 2015. Aircraft Accident Report NTSB/AAR-17/02.
Washington, DC: NTSB.
13 As part of the June 2015 accident investigation, the NTSB also issued Safety Recommendations
A-17-35 through -43, which addressed weather, terrain, operations, and FAA oversight. See
appendix B for more information about these safety recommendations.
7

Aviation Investigation Report
AIR-22-09
and additional training items.” Because those safety items, if widely adopted by air
tour pilots in the Ketchikan area, would have improved the safety of Part 135 air tour
flights in the area, on October 26, 2017, the NTSB classified Safety Recommendation
A-17-43 “Open—Acceptable Response.” When we did not receive additional
information about the FAA’s further actions, on July 22, 2020, we classified the safety
recommendation “Open—Unacceptable Response.”
In a March 24, 2022, response, the FAA stated that the FAA Alaska Aviation
Safety Initiative (FAASI) team issued its final report on September 30, 2021, which
discussed, in part, the need for improved weather reporting facilities.14 The FAA said
the FAASI, which is a comprehensive approach tailored to safety issues specific to
Alaska, will focus on improving weather reporting. The FAA also indicated that
because Safety Recommendation A-17-43 will be included as part of the agency’s
ongoing efforts to implement the FAASI’s recommended actions, it was finished
responding to A-17-43. The NTSB notes that although the FAASI report included two
recommendations to improve weather reporting in Alaska, it neither addressed the
weather and terrain operational hazards in the Ketchikan area nor proposed
requiring more conservative weather minimums.
In response to continued fatal accidents involving air tour aircraft in other
geographic areas with distinct operational hazards, the FAA has previously
developed and implemented special federal aviation regulations (SFARs).15 SFARs
establish minimum flight altitudes and airspace limitations for certain geographic
areas, among other procedural and operational requirements that all operations are
required to follow in specific locations, such as SFAR 50 for the Grand Canyon area
and SFAR 71 in Hawaii.
14 The NTSB notes that the FAASI report is responsive to Safety Recommendation A-20-11. Issued
in 2020 following our September 2019 roundtable intended to improve the safety of Part 135
operations in Alaska, Safety Recommendation A-20-11 asked the FAA to “implement a safety-focused
working group to review, prioritize, and integrate Alaska's aviation safety needs into the FAA's safety
enhancement process.” The NTSB classified Safety Recommendation A-20-11 as “Open—Acceptable
Response” on August 21, 2020, after the FAA’s initial response that it would determine the most
effective way to form such a working group. This recommendation remained classified “Open—
Acceptable Response” after the FAA’s January 19, 2021, response that it convened a working group of
aviation stakeholders to guide safety initiatives in Alaska. For more information on Safety
Recommendation A-20-11, see NTSB. 2020. Revise Processes to Implement Safety Enhancements for
Alaska Aviation Operations. ASR-20/02. Washington, DC: NTSB.
15 Unlike the special operating rules recommended in Safety Recommendation A-17-43, which
could include voluntary or recommended items, SFARs are regulatory requirements and are
enforceable by the FAA.
8

Aviation Investigation Report
AIR-22-09
Implemented in 2018, SFAR 50 addressed airspace limitations, aircraft
operations, flight-free zones, and minimum flight altitudes in the Grand Canyon.16 In
1994, SFAR 71 established procedural, operational, and equipment safety
requirements for air tour helicopters and minimum flight altitudes for all air tours in
the state of Hawaii. In 2003, the FAA stated that SFAR 71 had been effective at
decreasing the fatality rate for air tour accidents in Hawaii since it was established.17
The continuing fatal Part 135 air tour accidents in the Ketchikan area show that
current regulations and voluntary operator actions to implement more conservative
weather minimums and address the weather and terrain operational hazards
associated with air tours are insufficient. Thus, the NTSB concludes that the actions
taken by the FAA to date to improve air tour airplane safety in the Ketchikan area
have not effectively mitigated the risks associated with conducting VFR flight in the
area’s surrounding mountainous terrain and weather conditions. The NTSB also
concludes that the distinct operational hazards unique to air tour airplane flights in
the Ketchikan area warrant additional actions by the FAA and operators to ensure the
safety of air tours. The FAA’s development and implementation of an SFAR specific to
the Ketchikan area would provide the FAA the ability to enforce air tour operators’
adherence to these needed additional safety requirements.
In developing an SFAR, applying the knowledge of experts most familiar with
weather conditions in the area would also be beneficial. The local National Weather
Service could provide valuable input on safe weather conditions for flying. Local
operators have already worked with the FAA to develop the voluntary operator LOA
that includes many items that would prevent VFR flight into IMC, including standard
tour routes, alternate routes for poor weather days, and reporting adverse weather
16 In 1987, the FAA established SFAR 50 for the Grand Canyon airspace in response to a
June 1986 midair collision that resulted in 25 fatalities (DCA86AA028) and widespread attention on
the safety of Grand Canyon air tour flights. After numerous legal challenges and revisions over the next
30 years, the FAA implemented SFAR 50 on March 5, 2018.
17 a) SFAR 71 was developed because of a marked increase in fatal accidents and insufficient
voluntary measures. For more information on the effectiveness of SFAR 71 between 1994 and 2003,
see NARA. 2003. “Air Tour Operators in the State of Hawaii; Final Rule.” Federal Register. Vol. 68.
Washington, DC: NARA, October 23. 60839. b) The NTSB’s investigation of a December 2019 air tour
helicopter accident in Hawaii found however, that the FAA has since authorized numerous air tour
operators to deviate from the SFAR’s 1,500-foot minimum altitude requirement, that the Honolulu
FSDO’s in-person surveillance of Hawaii air tour operators had decreased in the 3 years preceding the
accident, and that some pilots in the local air tour community may have routinely engaged in risky
weather-related operating practices. The FAA’s routine surveillance of air tour flight operations is
critical for ensuring the effectiveness of an SFAR and any related requirements. For more information
about this accident investigation, see NTSB. 2022. Collision into Terrain, Safari Aviation Inc., Airbus
AS350 B2, N985SA. AIR-22-05. Washington, DC: NTSB.
9

Aviation Investigation Report
AIR-22-09
conditions. But, as stated earlier, the voluntary nature of this program diminishes its
effectiveness. Therefore, the NTSB recommends that the FAA, in collaboration with
the local National Weather Service, develop and issue an SFAR for air tour airplane
flights in the Ketchikan area that imposes weather minimums that are more
conservative than those specified in Part 135 and requires the operational elements
of the Ketchikan operators’ voluntary LOA such as standard tour routes, alternate
routes for poor weather days, and reporting adverse weather conditions. The NTSB
also recommends that local National Weather Service staff work with the FAA to
develop the SFAR in Safety Recommendation A-22-25 for air tour airplane flights in
the Ketchikan area that imposes weather minimums that are more conservative than
those specified in Part 135.
Because an SFAR, if implemented, would address the need for special
operating rules concerning the weather and terrain hazards around Ketchikan in
Safety Recommendation A-17-43, and because the FAA considers its actions
complete and plans no further action the NTSB classifies Safety Recommendation A-
17-43 “Closed—Unacceptable Action/Superseded” and classifies Safety
Recommendation A-22-25 “Open—Unacceptable Response.”
Weather-Related Training
In 2008, the NTSB issued Safety Recommendations A-08-61 and -62, which
asked the FAA to develop a cue-based training that addressed Ketchikan weather
hazards and to require that local operators regularly provide that training to their
pilots. Cue-based training programs expose pilots to realistic depictions of
deteriorating in-flight weather to foster an ability to accurately assess and respond
appropriately to cues associated with deteriorating weather.
In response to those safety recommendations and in cooperation with the
Medallion Foundation, the FAA developed cue-based training that was conducted in
Medallion’s approved basic aviation training device (BATD), and air tour operators
voluntarily incorporated these concepts into their FAA-approved training programs.18
As a result, the NTSB classified Safety Recommendations A-08-61 and -62 “Closed—
Acceptable Action” and “Closed—Acceptable Alternate Action,” respectively.
18 The Medallion Foundation, a non-profit Alaskan safety organization, was established by a state
industry group of air carriers to improve pilot safety awareness and reduce air carrier insurance rates.
Between 2002 and 2019, it received funding from the FAA to, among other things, administer safety
initiatives including the purchase and maintenance of flight training devices, passenger safety
awareness campaigns, and management of the Aviation Safety Action Program. The Medallion
Foundation ceased operation in 2019.
10

Aviation Investigation Report
AIR-22-09
We issued similar cue-based training recommendations in 2007 for Hawaii air
tour operations.19 The FAA’s March 8, 2011, response to the Hawaii air tour
recommendations indicated that it had established a cue-based weather training
project management team to develop and produce “high quality, comprehensive,
expert-vetted, cue-based weather and in-flight decision-making visual training aids”
for air tour operators in both Hawaii and Alaska. However, during the investigation of
the December 2019 air tour helicopter accident in Hawaii noted previously, we found
the FAA’s commitment to taking such action had diminished over time, and it instead
attempted to shift responsibility for developing cue-based training to the air tour
operators.20
We have expressed similar concerns to the FAA regarding the cue-based
training in Ketchikan developed by Medallion. During the NTSB’s investigation of the
June 2015 air tour accident in Ketchikan, investigators discovered that the cue-based
training module that the accident pilot had completed using Medallion’s BATD had
limited effectiveness because the ceiling height and forward visibility depicted on the
BATD did not portray the dynamic, variable, and localized patterns that often
characterize real-world weather conditions, and the terrain features and ground
texture were not photorealistic.21 Based on these and other investigative findings, in
2017, the NTSB issued Safety Recommendation A-17-37, which asked the FAA to do
the following:
Work with members of the Ketchikan air tour industry to improve
existing training programs aimed at reducing the risk of weather-related
accidents involving continuation of flight under visual flight rules into
instrument meteorological conditions, with special attention paid to the
human factors issues identified in this investigation, including (1) the
need to help pilots better calibrate what constitutes safe weather
conditions to conduct flights based on objective standards and
requirements, such as set criteria for what landmarks must be clearly
19 Based on our investigation of a 2004 helicopter accident in Hawaii involving VFR flight into IMC,
we issued Safety Recommendation A-07-18 and -19, which asked the FAA to develop and require a
cue-based training program for commercial air tour pilots in Hawaii. For more information on this
accident investigation, see NTSB. 2007. Weather Encounter and Subsequent Collision into Terrain, Bali
Hai Helicopter Tours, Inc., Bell 206B, N16849, Kalaheo, Hawaii, September 24, 2004. AAR-07/03.
Washington, DC: NTSB.
20 As part of the December 2019 accident investigation, we classified Safety Recommendations A-
07-18 and -19 as “Open—Unacceptable Response.”
21 For more information, see NTSB. 2017. Collision with Terrain, Promech Air, Inc., de Havilland
DHC-3, N270PA, Ketchikan, Alaska, June 25, 2015. Aircraft Accident Report NTSB/AAR-17/02.
Washington, DC: NTSB.
11

Aviation Investigation Report
AIR-22-09
visible from which locations in order to proceed on a particular route;
(2) the need to help pilots who are new to the area recognize dynamic
local weather patterns that can place them in a dangerous situation; and
(3) operational influences on pilot decision-making.
On July 21, 2017, the FAA responded that it was addressing the safety
recommendation through its biannual meetings with Ketchikan operators and its
safety campaigns addressing controlled flight into terrain, avionics training, and
cue-based training. Because we believed those efforts could address the safety
recommendation, on October 26, 2017, the NTSB classified Safety Recommendation
A-17-37 “Open—Acceptable Response.”
On February 17, 2020, the FAA responded that it had worked with operators
to approve voluntary cue-based training; that operators had used Medallion to share
best practices and improve their safety programs; and that operators trained new
pilots before the start of each tour season. The FAA indicated that because these
actions improved existing training programs, it was finished responding to A-17-37.
However, Medallion closed in 2019, and the BATD it used for cue-based
training is no longer available to air tour pilots.22 In addition, we responded that the
FAA cannot effectively oversee and ensure the effectiveness of cue-based training
that individual operators implement, including the cue-based training the June 2015
accident pilot received, because the training is not required. Following the closure of
Medallion in 2019 and because of the limited effectiveness of voluntary operator
training, on July 22, 2020, we classified the safety recommendation “Open—
Unacceptable Response.”
On April 19, 2022, the FAA responded to Safety Recommendation A-17-37
that it continues to hold biannual safety meetings with air tour operators in Southeast
Alaska and that the voluntary operator LOA improves aviation safety; however, the
FAA did not specify how these actions improved training programs. The FAA
indicated that because its actions to date were responsive to our July 2020 response,
it is finished responding to A-17-37. However, as we noted previously, the cue-based
training that the FAA developed in conjunction with Medallion for use by Alaska air
tour operators—which Safety Recommendation A-17-37 sought to improve—no longer
exists.
22 According to one Ketchikan director of operations interviewed as part of the August 2021
accident investigation, Medallion’s cue-based training simulators are now owned by the Civil Air Patrol
and are no longer available to Ketchikan air tour pilots.
12

Aviation Investigation Report
AIR-22-09
The NTSB concludes that the August 2021 accident and other weather-related
fatal air tour airplane accidents in the Ketchikan area since 2007 demonstrate the
continued need for improved pilot training on reducing the risk of weather-related
accidents involving continuation of flight under VFR into IMC. Therefore, the NTSB
recommends that the FAA develop and require training for all Ketchikan air tour
airplane pilots aimed at reducing the risk of weather-related accidents involving
continuation of flight under VFR into IMC. The training should include (1) objective
standards, such as landmarks that must be clearly visible from particular locations that
pilots can use to determine whether weather conditions are safe for continued flight
on a particular route; and (2) a module that helps pilots recognize dynamic local
weather patterns that can place them in a dangerous situation.
Because the FAA has only relied on voluntary actions by operators in response
to Safety Recommendation A-17-37, they have not effectively improved pilot training
to reduce weather-related accidents involving continuation of VFR flights into IMC,
and because the FAA considers its actions complete and plans no further action, the
NTSB classifies Safety Recommendation A-17-37 “Closed—Unacceptable
Action/Superseded” and classifies Safety Recommendation A-22-26 “Open—
Unacceptable Response.”
