Aviation Investigation Report
NTSB/AIR-22-08
October 26, 2022 AIR-22-08
Require Immediate One-Time Inspection of
De Havilland Canada DHC-3 Horizontal
Stabilizer Actuator
Introduction
The National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB) is providing the following
information to urge the Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) and Transport Canada
to take immediate action on the safety recommendations in this report. We identified
this issue during our ongoing investigation of the September 4, 2022, accident
involving a De Havilland Canada DHC-3, N725TH, which entered a nose-down,
near-vertical descent and impacted the water in Mutiny Bay, near Freeland,
Washington. The NTSB is issuing one urgent safety recommendation to the FAA and
one urgent safety recommendation to Transport Canada.
Background and Analysis
On September 4, 2022, about 1509 Pacific daylight time, a De Havilland
Canada DHC-3, N725TH, impacted the water in Mutiny Bay, near Freeland,
Washington, and sank.1 The pilot and nine passengers were fatally injured, and the
airplane was destroyed. The scheduled flight was operated by Northwest Seaplanes
dba Friday Harbor Seaplanes under Title 14 Code of Federal Regulations Part 135.2
The accident occurred during the second flight leg of the day. The airplane
departed from Friday Harbor Seaplane Base, Friday Harbor, Washington, about 1450
and was destined for Renton Municipal Airport, Renton, Washington. Witnesses near
the accident site reported, and security camera video showed, that the airplane was
in level flight before it entered a slight climb and then pitched down in a nose-low,
near-vertical descent until water impact.
1 Viking Air Limited is the current type certificate holder for the DHC-3 airplane.
2 Visit ntsb.gov to find additional information for this ongoing NTSB investigation (case no.
DCA22MA193).
1

Aviation Investigation Report
NTSB/AIR-22-08
A review of FAA tracking data revealed that the accident flight lasted about
18 minutes with the airplane in cruise flight at altitudes mostly between 600 and
700 ft mean seal level (msl) and at groundspeeds between 115 and 125 knots. During
the final minutes of the flight, the airplane began a climb, reaching a maximum
altitude of about 1,000 ft msl before entering a rapid descent. The data ended shortly
thereafter.
During the examination of the airplane wreckage, the NTSB found that the
clamp nut that attaches the top eye end and bearing assembly of the horizontal
stabilizer actuator (also referred to as the trim jack assembly) to the actuator barrel
had unscrewed from the barrel.3 The examination also found that the circular wire
lock ring, which was designed to prevent the clamp nut from unscrewing, was not
present.4 Examination of the threads of the clamp nut and actuator barrel at the
NTSB’s Materials Laboratory showed no evidence that the threads failed in overstress
or that the clamp nut and the horizontal stabilizer actuator barrel pulled apart from
each other (that is, no evidence of stripped threads was found). Figure 1 shows a
diagram of a horizontal stabilizer actuator, figure 2 shows an exemplar lock ring (with
the tang that is secured into the clamp nut), and figure 3 shows the clamp nut and the
lock ring groove around the barrel separated, as found during the airplane
examination.
3 The horizontal stabilizer actuator is part of the airplane’s pitch trim control system. The pitch trim
wheel, which is located in the cockpit, is used to rotate the actuator through control cables without
electrical or hydraulic assistance, extending (lengthening) or retracting (shortening) the overall length
of the actuator. This extension or retraction changes the incidence of the horizontal stabilizer, thereby
providing a mechanism for the pilot to relieve elevator control force pressure.
4 The operation to recover the airplane wreckage from the sea floor was completed on
September 30, 2022, with about 85% of the airplane recovered. The wreckage was transported to the
examination facility on October 3 and was examined from October 4 to 7. Follow-up activities in the
NTSB Materials Laboratory occurred on October 18 and 19. As of the date of this report, the lock ring
has not been found in the airplane wreckage.
2

Aviation Investigation Report
NTSB/AIR-22-08
Figure 1. Horizontal stabilizer actuator (Source: Viking Air Limited).
Figure 2. Exemplar lock ring.
3

Aviation Investigation Report
NTSB/AIR-22-08
Figure 3. Clamp nut and barrel separation on accident airplane.
As shown in figure 3, the actuator is attached to the horizontal stabilizer with a
bolt that connects the top eye end of the actuator to the rear mounting structure on
the stabilizer. According to the DHC-3 aircraft maintenance manual, a clamp nut
attaches the top eye end and bearing assembly to the barrel of the actuator. Both the
clamp nut and the barrel end of the horizontal stabilizer actuator are threaded so that
the clamp nut can be securely screwed into the actuator barrel.
During normal assembly, once the clamp nut is tightly screwed into the
horizontal stabilizer actuator barrel, a hole is drilled through the clamp nut so that the
hole aligns with another hole in the lock ring groove on the actuator barrel.5 The part
of the lock ring that is bent inward (the tang) fits into the drilled hole, engaging both
the barrel and the clamp nut and preventing the clamp nut from unscrewing from the
5 Five holes had been drilled into the accident clamp nut threads; three holes were damaged to
the extent that they would not have allowed for the full insertion of the lock ring pin. Thus, it is possible
for a lock ring not to be fully inserted into the clamp nut through those holes. The maintenance manual
does not specify whether it is acceptable for the clamp nut to have multiple holes drilled; the
investigation is exploring this issue.
4

Aviation Investigation Report
NTSB/AIR-22-08
barrel. If the actuator barrel and the clamp nut are not secured together and become
separated, the actuator would not be able to control the position of the horizontal
stabilizer, resulting in a reduction or loss of pitch control.6
At this time, the NTSB does not know whether the lock ring was present before
the airplane impacted the water or why the lock ring was not present during the
airplane examination. Our investigation into this accident, which is expected to
include an evaluation of lock ring failure modes and a review of maintenance records
and lock ring installation instructions, is ongoing. However, given the findings thus far
from the investigation, we are concerned that a missing or an improperly installed
lock ring on other DHC-3 airplanes has the potential to result in a catastrophic loss of
control.
On October 26, 2022, Viking Air Limited published Service Letter (SL)
DHC3-SL-27- 001, DHC-3 Stabilizer Actuator Lock Ring – Special Inspection.7 The SL
recommended that DHC-3 airplane operators “visually confirm that the stabilizer
actuator lock ring is present, correctly seated in the groove in the upper
housing…and the lock ring tang is engaged in the clamp nut.” Viking Air Limited
stated that this action was to be performed “upon receiving this SL, regardless of
when the most recent maintenance was completed.”
The actions described in the SL, if taken, should address the safety issue that
we have identified thus far in this investigation. We note, however, that the SL is only
advisory and that the potential for a catastrophic loss of control warrants immediate
and mandatory action; the FAA (for US operators) and Transport Canada (the
regulator for the state of design and manufacture of the airplane) have the authority
to mandate such action.
The NTSB concludes that a missing or an improperly installed horizontal
stabilizer actuator lock ring is an immediate safety hazard because it could result in a
reduction or loss of pitch control during flight in De Havilland Canada DHC-3
airplanes. Further, a requirement for operators to report the findings of their
inspections could help identify the scope of the problem. Therefore, the NTSB
recommends that the FAA require all operators of De Havilland Canada DHC-3
airplanes to conduct an immediate one-time inspection of the horizontal stabilizer
actuator lock ring in accordance with the instructions in Viking Air Limited
SL DHC3-SL-27-001 and report their findings to the FAA. The NTSB also recommends
that Transport Canada require all operators of De Havilland Canada DHC-3 airplanes
to conduct an immediate one-time inspection of the horizontal stabilizer actuator lock
6 The actuator is the only means to hold the horizontal stabilizer in its position. If the clamp nut
becomes unscrewed from the barrel during flight, the horizontal stabilizer would be able to rotate
uncontrollably (trailing edge up or down) about its hinge.
7 The SL was dated October 25, 2022.
5

Aviation Investigation Report
NTSB/AIR-22-08
ring in accordance with the instructions in Viking Air Limited SL DHC3-SL-27-001 and
report their findings to Transport Canada.
The NTSB notes that the need for these immediate actions is based on
preliminary findings during our ongoing investigation. Additional actions may be
recommended as the investigation proceeds.
